[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: We behave as if we are subjects, not citizens.
[Amit Varma]: As if the laws that exist in this country do so for the purpose of our overlords monitoring
[Amit Varma]: our behaviour.
[Amit Varma]: Our free speech laws are a great example of this.
[Amit Varma]: Section 295A, 153A and 124A are all throwbacks from the British Empire which framed the Indian
[Amit Varma]: Penal Code to keep us natives under their control.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, even after independence, even 72 years after independence, we are still oppressed
[Amit Varma]: by largely the same set of laws designed to keep us in check.
[Amit Varma]: Section 124A, the law against sedition, is a great example of this.
[Amit Varma]: It is natural for an oppressive autocratic state to have a law such as this.
[Amit Varma]: But why must a responsive democracy have a sedition law?
[Amit Varma]: It's actually the duty of citizens to constantly point out the flaws in our government, to
[Amit Varma]: speak truth to power.
[Amit Varma]: We live in times where those in power actually speak of strengthening the sedition law, where
[Amit Varma]: it is used to harass dissenters and to have a chilling effect on would-be dissenters.
[Amit Varma]: To speak up against this is our duty.
[Amit Varma]: Is it also criminal?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for today is Chitranshul Sinha, who has written a fantastic history of the sedition
[Amit Varma]: law in India, Section 124A.
[Amit Varma]: His book is called The Great Repression and is basically an excellent book of history
[Amit Varma]: that places the framing of laws in the context of the political and social environments in
[Amit Varma]: which they were born, an extremely insightful book with many TIL moments.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with Chitranshul, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Wazvoo x Wazvoo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy
[Amit Varma]: just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Chitranshul, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about yourself before we start talking about your book.
[Amit Varma]: Like you know, you're a lawyer and now you've written this book, which is ostensibly a book
[Amit Varma]: about law, but it's really a book of history and an excellent one at that.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your background?
[Amit Varma]: Where are you from?
[Guest]: How did you become a lawyer?
[Guest]: So I'm from Ranchi.
[Guest]: It's a place in Jharkhand.
[Guest]: MS Dhoni fame and from the same school.
[Amit Varma]: So if someone says MS Dhoni should retire, is that seditious in Jharkhand?
[Guest]: I really hope it becomes, those guys should be punished.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I'm from Ranchi.
[Guest]: I come from a background of science.
[Guest]: I was not a arts or humanities student, but then law happened by accident and even history
[Guest]: happened by accident.
[Guest]: I hated history till I started reading it after college.
[Guest]: So both accidental things combined into this book.
[Guest]: So I studied law from Pune, Symbiosis Pune, five year course.
[Guest]: Then I started practicing in 2009 and I'm an AOR of the Supreme Court and a partner
[Guest]: with a pan-India law firm.
[Guest]: And this is something I do on the side to keep myself happy.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess when you start studying law, initially it's a subject.
[Amit Varma]: So you're looking at the textbooks and you're studying law and it's the subjects and all
[Amit Varma]: that, but it's much broader and deeper than that.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many stories behind it.
[Amit Varma]: And the history of law in a sense is a history of society and a history of people and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: At what point did you start to get interested in these sort of broader aspects?
[Guest]: I would say in college, in college when we were studying jurisprudence and we were studying
[Guest]: legal history, that's when I started understanding that you can't look at law in isolation.
[Guest]: It doesn't operate in a vacuum.
[Guest]: It has to do with what the society of that day is like.
[Guest]: So you have to understand society and politics of the day to understand law.
[Guest]: So you can't look at it in isolation.
[Guest]: That's where I understood law.
[Guest]: And then you start reading about world history and laws around the world.
[Guest]: Then you understand how those things correlate with each other.
[Amit Varma]: And what were the sort of great books on law or legal history that sort of influenced you?
[Guest]: So I'll confess that there's no such book which influenced me.
[Guest]: I would have actually not read legal history as a, because I really didn't like any, started
[Guest]: some, I didn't like any other than maybe A.G.
[Guest]: Noorani's great trials.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I really didn't enjoy legal history books because they're very dry for my taste
[Amit Varma]: at least.
[Amit Varma]: That was an interesting sort of cautionary lesson you seem to have taken because your
[Amit Varma]: book is anything but dry.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the kind of stuff that you would read like intellectually, what makes you the
[Amit Varma]: person you are?
[Guest]: What are your sort of influences outside of law?
[Guest]: Outside of law?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: To be honest, I actually don't have an answer for this.
[Guest]: So how did the book come about?
[Guest]: So I was writing columns.
[Guest]: There's this very good friend of mine, Rukun, who used to work with Penguin earlier.
[Guest]: And she said she thought that I would write a book I never thought I would.
[Guest]: And she connected me with Mansi, who's a commissioning editor at Penguin.
[Guest]: And she sort of did an inception on me.
[Guest]: She told me I should pick a topic to write on.
[Guest]: And I gave her five options.
[Guest]: She said, you should write on sedition.
[Guest]: I said, Oh, should I?
[Guest]: She said, yes, you should write on sedition.
[Guest]: Now you pitch the idea to us.
[Guest]: So then I thought about how to go about it.
[Guest]: And then I created this structure for this book.
[Guest]: And then they said, Oh, fine, we approve of your idea.
[Guest]: So the idea was they themselves gave me the approval of the idea.
[Guest]: And that's how that book happened.
[Amit Varma]: That's very cunning.
[Amit Varma]: What were the other four?
[Guest]: So I was thinking about writing of these archaic laws, which is stupid.
[Guest]: One of those laws were adultery laws.
[Guest]: So all these Victorian laws, which shouldn't have existed in post independence India, I
[Guest]: want to write about all those laws.
[Amit Varma]: But she restricted me to this one law.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, adultery 377.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've in fact had episodes on.
[Amit Varma]: So when you decided when they asked you to pitch your idea to them, I suppose you started
[Amit Varma]: thinking about it a bit.
[Amit Varma]: Was a book that you pitched to them similar to the one that you wrote?
[Guest]: It's almost identical.
[Guest]: Maybe it grew a little more in scope, in the sense that I realized that the topic is too
[Guest]: vast to restrict it to anything.
[Guest]: So the general structure remained the same.
[Guest]: But I added a little more bulk to the history part to the origin part.
[Guest]: When I started writing, I did not realize that I would spend so much time on origin
[Guest]: or so many chapters on origin and pre independence aspects of tradition law, but it really grew
[Guest]: to a huge volume.
[Guest]: So I actually had to control myself stop myself from writing further on it.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I found that history part especially I mean, the book is a book of history and
[Amit Varma]: I found it really fascinating because I learned stuff I didn't know about English law, how
[Amit Varma]: it originated, about, you know, how it evolved in colonial times, and also all the sort of
[Amit Varma]: the political and social context that you set to everything.
[Amit Varma]: So once you I mean, the narrative you pitched, obviously, then is how the law has evolved
[Amit Varma]: over the centuries and where we are now.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, you realized that okay, it's going to be a bit of a book of history.
[Amit Varma]: Did you read a lot of history?
[Guest]: I read history, but I did not read Indian history as much as I would have liked to.
[Guest]: I usually read world history.
[Guest]: And in fact, when I started writing this book, that's when I started looking at this more
[Guest]: seriously.
[Guest]: And I realized there's a lot which went behind, let's say the Indian Penal Code itself.
[Guest]: So by while I was writing about sedition, I realized it's very important to write about
[Guest]: the Penal Code first, because you will not understand the context of this section 124
[Guest]: a which provides for the offense of sedition, unless you actually understand how the Indian
[Guest]: Penal Code came about to be.
[Guest]: And then when I started reading, to be very honest, I learned while I was researching,
[Guest]: I did not know these things before I started writing the book.
[Guest]: So I was educating myself and writing at the same time.
[Guest]: And so when I was reading that, then I realized that the laws which were in place before my
[Guest]: college draft court came in before the East India Company took complete control of Indian
[Guest]: courts and everything.
[Guest]: The laws were indigenous, there was no structure.
[Guest]: They were Hindus laws, they were Mohammedan laws for criminal prosecutions, they use Mohammedan
[Guest]: laws just modified a little bit to suit the Hindu subjects.
[Guest]: So criminal laws, mostly Mohammedan and civil laws, mostly Hindu.
[Guest]: So that the term code, which that Indian Penal Code, the term code is sort of a misnomer
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: Code usually is a compilation of existing laws.
[Guest]: It's like a compendium of laws.
[Guest]: But there was no such law in India, there was no such compilation to be done in India.
[Guest]: But so calling it a code as such is a misnomer.
[Guest]: But if you consider India's past, as in that most of our laws are borrowed from the English
[Guest]: common law system.
[Guest]: And in that sense, yes, because it was part of the British Empire.
[Guest]: So it was a code of laws, which were derived somewhat from the British Empire and then
[Guest]: somewhat from indigenous laws.
[Guest]: But in the true sense, it's not a code.
[Guest]: So these are things which I actually learned when I was reading about how to pitch the
[Guest]: book.
[Amit Varma]: And then when I started writing the book,
[Amit Varma]: And one of the like, whenever I read a book of history, one of the things that I keep
[Amit Varma]: doing is I keep going to the footnotes and I get drawn into all these rabbit holes.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing I noticed in your footnotes is that, you know, a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: sources are really arcane papers or arcane cases and not so much like I would have expected
[Amit Varma]: that if you're doing a book of popular history, you'll, you know, all the standard historical
[Amit Varma]: references will be there.
[Amit Varma]: But your research kind of went a lot deeper than that.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process like?
[Amit Varma]: And since you're not an academic, you're a working lawyer, you know, did you go time
[Amit Varma]: to archives or libraries or did you affiliate yourself with an institution?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you have to just work it all out on your own?
[Guest]: So I had to work it all on my own.
[Guest]: To be honest, I didn't go to the National Archives as other researchers or historians
[Guest]: would go on the Nehru Memorial Library.
[Guest]: I was constrained as far as time's concerned.
[Guest]: And so I had to budget my time accordingly.
[Guest]: So the resource that I use the most was archives that were achieved, which has absolutely everything
[Guest]: in the world, you just need to know how to find it.
[Guest]: So when I was researching, like you said, it's a rabbit hole.
[Guest]: And that was the past I most enjoyed of the entire process.
[Guest]: That was the part I most enjoyed.
[Guest]: Going down that rabbit hole was very, very enjoyable, because you go to the most recent
[Guest]: source, then you trace back to the source preceding that, then you trace back to that,
[Guest]: beyond that, and then you suddenly realize that you're reading books from the 19th century,
[Guest]: or the 18th century.
[Guest]: And I've read texts from the 13th century and the 14th century in English, which I could
[Guest]: barely understand.
[Guest]: And that's when you realize that to write a book where people don't point fingers at
[Guest]: you, you have to go to the origin.
[Guest]: You can't rely on most recent history because history is colored by politics.
[Guest]: History is colored by a person's bias.
[Guest]: So you have to go to the source, the farthest you can go, you have to go there.
[Amit Varma]: It's not easy, but you have to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking about it strikes me as so mind blowing and so wonderful that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: because of the internet, regular folks like you and I actually have a shot at going to
[Amit Varma]: these basic primary older sources.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, otherwise, to just get access to these kind of archives, you'd have to be
[Amit Varma]: a professional historian and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And now literally anyone can I mean, I'm obviously you know, when we were talking over coffee
[Amit Varma]: before this, I recommended Dan Collins podcast, Hardcore History.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, he was basically a radio broadcaster.
[Amit Varma]: He wasn't a historian.
[Amit Varma]: And yet he is able to produce these remarkable works of history because the world is at his
[Guest]: fingertips.
[Guest]: There are too many gatekeepers of knowledge today.
[Guest]: Too many gatekeepers to just to enter the archives, you have to show your credentials
[Guest]: that you're a researcher of some sort like a person like you or me can't just simply
[Guest]: walk into it and say that I want to read something relating to the Mughal era or about Clive.
[Guest]: I need to show them that yes, I'm a researcher for something.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I can't go there.
[Guest]: Why can't I go there?
[Guest]: Why can't people like you and me go just walk in and learn?
[Guest]: Because to be honest, the internet is a great resource and archives is an absolutely wonderful
[Guest]: resource.
[Guest]: And I so in fact, I while I was reading it, I felt so bad about using it so much that
[Guest]: I actually started donating to it.
[Guest]: And we have to do that.
[Guest]: Otherwise, we won't get those resources.
[Guest]: And even though it's a huge resource, still archives have certain things which you will
[Guest]: not find in public, like the original draft penal code.
[Guest]: When I was started writing the book, it took me four months to actually find it.
[Guest]: And that to online.
[Guest]: I don't know whether it's in some library or not.
[Guest]: But all the people I talked to and I told them I have the original, I have the draft
[Guest]: penal code of Macaulay's code of 1933 and 1937.
[Guest]: And they said, How did you get it?
[Guest]: People don't know it.
[Guest]: People haven't read what's written there.
[Guest]: They haven't seen his notes.
[Guest]: And there are things like we know that Macaulay drafted it.
[Guest]: But there's another person called Bethune, who also came up with a draft code.
[Guest]: He hated Macaulay.
[Guest]: He said, I want to do my own thing.
[Guest]: And he paced this draft code to the East India Company, to the government then and he said,
[Guest]: my code is better, but it was very conservative and very, the punishments were very draconian.
[Guest]: So they eventually junked it.
[Guest]: So before writing it, I did not know that such a draft code existed.
[Guest]: Why don't we know this?
[Guest]: Because we're not allowed to go into those places to learn about it.
[Guest]: So we need open access, like archives helps, but we need open access to our libraries,
[Guest]: all these archives.
[Guest]: We do otherwise, it's not going to work.
[Guest]: People are today, especially in today when people unlearn the history from WhatsApp and
[Guest]: from social media, they need to go to these places to verify themselves.
[Guest]: Otherwise, what they're relying on is again, bad information.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess very newbie question, I guess in an ideal world, what all the archives and
[Amit Varma]: all these repositories of documents should do is digitize everything put it up for free.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. Is that kind of happening or are the gatekeepers holding first?
[Guest]: See where the laws are beyond the copyright period, I think they can still be it's happening.
[Guest]: But most people will see I still understand the author has to get the royalty and everyone
[Guest]: has to be paid for what they published.
[Guest]: But their articles like JSTOR is expensive for even for a person like me, I could not
[Guest]: afford to have all those articles.
[Guest]: So I used to rely on more four or five free articles a month.
[Guest]: That's how bad it is.
[Guest]: You have people who submit these papers, academic papers, and they themselves have to buy it
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: They don't have access to even the PDFs.
[Guest]: So even to get the PDFs, they have to buy it back.
[Guest]: Why is it so expensive?
[Guest]: A person who's himself written something, he should get free access to it, even he's
[Guest]: not getting free access to it.
[Guest]: So today, these things which if an author wants to put it out in public, he should be
[Guest]: allowed to if he doesn't want to earn out of it.
[Guest]: Fine, I understand the publishers put in money.
[Guest]: But beyond a period of time, you should make this knowledge public.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you're not going to learn otherwise, misinformation will keep spreading without
[Guest]: verification.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I'm not sure that making everything available does anything about misinformation,
[Amit Varma]: because misinformation spreads because people want to be misinformed.
[Amit Varma]: That's also true.
[Amit Varma]: And because they're just lazy, and they want to read the latest slice of WhatsApp history.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's kind of go to your book now.
[Amit Varma]: And your book really starts off with the East India Company coming to India.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing here, of course, is that there's no India as such there are
[Amit Varma]: many different princely states, and they come as traders and they're given trading rights
[Amit Varma]: and then negotiating their way through it.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it pretty interesting how they are gradually trying to figure out what laws
[Amit Varma]: apply to them, what laws apply to them for internal disputes, what laws apply to them
[Amit Varma]: on ships and on the land, what you know, how do they, if there's a dispute between them
[Amit Varma]: and locals, what happens?
[Guest]: Can you sort of elaborate a bit on?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So yes, when the East India Company came is very interesting, actually.
[Guest]: So we used to keep reading about these factories that they had set up.
[Guest]: So it's not a manufacturing factory.
[Guest]: It's a place where East India Company's factors established the trade.
[Guest]: Factors were people who would trade with the indigenous native traders, and then send some
[Amit Varma]: back home and then bring stuff here.
[Amit Varma]: So factors are basically like the agents like agents, the ship comes, it leaves the factors,
[Amit Varma]: and negotiate, we will sell you this, we will buy this.
[Guest]: Yes, they're like middlemen, mostly.
[Guest]: And that's how the term factory comes in.
[Guest]: Now that term where what they use a Surat factory and the Madras factory, that's how
[Guest]: the term factory comes in.
[Guest]: And when they got their factories, they realized that they have to fortify these factories.
[Guest]: So they got their own militia, let's call them the militia, they are not like really
[Guest]: British soldiers, they're militia, private mercenaries.
[Guest]: So they got them, they set up these forts, and they set up their own communities.
[Guest]: But the trouble was that there was life beyond these communities also, they would try life
[Guest]: beyond these four walls, which was called referred to as a Mofasil.
[Guest]: So that term still exists when we call when we talk about Mofasil towns, that small town
[Guest]: in India, they use the term Mofasil to be places which are beyond these limits of these
[Guest]: presidency towns, like beyond Bombay or beyond Madras, the presidency towns, I'm not talking
[Guest]: about the region in general, I'm just talking about town.
[Guest]: Even for example, Bombay, what you call town today, fort today was actually what the town
[Guest]: of Bombay was beyond that it was not Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, it was Mofasil.
[Guest]: Yes, Thane was Mofasil, Dadar was Mofasil.
[Guest]: So even in Calcutta, the town was presidency controlled by the president of the factory.
[Guest]: And anything beyond that, like Murshidabad, Hooghly, everything was Mofasil.
[Guest]: So trouble started when there were disputes between Indians and the British or there were
[Guest]: disputes amongst the British themselves.
[Guest]: There was confusion that how what law should apply initially started with if someone did
[Guest]: something some British citizen did something on a ship, then yes, a martial law could be
[Guest]: applied.
[Guest]: But what if he did something on land, what law would apply?
[Guest]: So there was confusion.
[Guest]: So there's a very interesting incident where the East India Company and the British courts,
[Guest]: the presidency courts had a major conflict.
[Guest]: And there was a zamindar who was being prosecuted by the British courts, like when I say British
[Guest]: courts, not the East India Company courts, and was being protected by the company troops
[Guest]: and the company courts.
[Guest]: So then they realized they changed the law eventually.
[Guest]: And they said that, okay, fine, if you are a British citizen, or there are disputes between
[Guest]: two British citizens, then the British law would apply.
[Guest]: But if you're an Indian citizen, and it's just something criminal in nature, then Nizami
[Guest]: laws would apply, which is a leftover from the Mughals.
[Guest]: So this actually continued till very, very late.
[Guest]: This continued till I would say the latter part of the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: So it was all about even after the IPC was no after the IPC.
[Guest]: So IPC only extended to presidency towns.
[Guest]: So all these princely states and autonomous provinces had their own laws.
[Guest]: The other had its own.
[Guest]: Yeah, like, I don't know what other but Jammu and Kashmir, for example, the Ranbir Penal
[Guest]: Code.
[Guest]: It's till date, they have their own penal code, which I am assuming will go now.
[Guest]: So they had their own systems and all such as in place.
[Amit Varma]: Like you mentioned about how eventually, the East India Company evolved to a status where
[Amit Varma]: they looked after what you call the Diwani rights, which is a civil justice system, the
[Amit Varma]: revenue rights and the Nizami or the criminal justice powers remained with the Nizam and
[Amit Varma]: his administrators.
[Amit Varma]: Another very interesting part of the book was as far as local laws are concerned, how
[Amit Varma]: the locals were sort of administered was that as far as civil laws or personal laws are
[Amit Varma]: concerned depends on you know, the Hindus had their own thing, the Muslims have their
[Unknown]: own thing.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as a criminal justice system was concerned, it was a Mohammedan law which sort
[Guest]: of applied.
[Guest]: Yes, but that was true for the natives, not for British subjects.
[Guest]: If there was a British subject under prosecution, he had to be prosecuted by a presidency court,
[Guest]: or if a company could prosecuted him, then it had to be done according to British laws.
[Amit Varma]: So how did sort of then these laws evolve?
[Amit Varma]: So initially, the East India Company comes, they're only traders, they've got factors
[Amit Varma]: in there, these factors and eventually the you know, factories are made, the militia
[Amit Varma]: comes in to look after them, you have these towns coming, the presidency is coming up
[Amit Varma]: with the Mofasil around them.
[Amit Varma]: How are the laws evolving?
[Amit Varma]: Initially, it's okay, if there's a dispute between two British guys, the British laws
[Amit Varma]: apply if it's on a ship, it's martial law.
[Amit Varma]: But then eventually you become a part of the local society which had has its own thing
[Amit Varma]: going on where, you know, they have their own criminal laws, their own whatever, through
[Amit Varma]: the period that the East India Company was here until the IPC, the IPC, of course, came
[Amit Varma]: 1861, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, IPC was 1860.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So until that point in time, how has it evolved in the centuries before that?
[Guest]: So there were laws, it's not as if they did not have specific statutes, even in areas
[Guest]: controlled by the company, they had certain laws.
[Guest]: So there were regulations, there were things called the Bombay regulations, there were
[Guest]: things called the Madras regulations and Bengal regulations.
[Guest]: For criminal law, Bengal regulations were mostly used even in Bombay and Madras for
[Guest]: criminal prosecutions and criminal justice system.
[Guest]: So they had regulations, they had some random laws for certain things.
[Guest]: So it's not as if they did not have any laws.
[Guest]: They had these statutes, which were typically derived from British laws, the common law
[Guest]: system, because England does not have a typical legal system where everything is in the books.
[Guest]: It evolves from the law of the courts, a court decides something, it becomes a law.
[Guest]: It's not the other way around that, like in India, the statute dictates what the court
[Guest]: can do.
[Guest]: But in England, the courts dictated what the law became.
[Amit Varma]: It's what you call the common law system.
[Amit Varma]: Common law system.
[Guest]: So there's no origin document as such, it just evolves over a period of time.
[Guest]: Yes, so but there were laws, there were these regulations, which kept getting modified from
[Guest]: time to time to suit the need of the hour.
[Guest]: So it's not as if they did not have anything, they had laws, but yeah, it was not uniform
[Guest]: across the country.
[Guest]: So for example, in the Calcutta presidency, Bengal presidency, the punishment for forgery
[Guest]: was death.
[Guest]: Similarly, and for example, if you steal one rupee and the punishment is 10 years, stealing
[Guest]: 1000 rupees also 10 years, stealing 1 lakh is also 10 years.
[Guest]: So it's it was not proportionate at all.
[Guest]: So that is something which Macaulay also wanted to reform.
[Guest]: He points out that these laws number one that for the same offense, there's no proportionality
[Guest]: with regard to the gravity of the offense.
[Guest]: Then there are certain offenses which disturbed the local populations view.
[Guest]: So basically, it's something which even today, religious law or a customary law, you may
[Guest]: feel that no, it's necessary to have such a law like Sati when Sati was being banned,
[Guest]: it led to a huge uproar when the age of consent to have intercourse was raised from 10 to
[Guest]: 12.
[Guest]: It led to the first sedition trial in 1891.
[Guest]: So even people at that point of time, there were major discrepancies.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the interesting cases that you've written about in your book is King versus
[Amit Varma]: Maharaja Nand Kumar, yes, which is his root called Nand Kumar, who gets into this sort
[Amit Varma]: of ego battle with Warren Hastings.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about how that panned out.
[Guest]: So it's been referred to as a judicial murder in history.
[Guest]: It's been referred to as judicial murder.
[Guest]: The Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court was Elijah M. Pei and him and Hastings were
[Guest]: buddies.
[Guest]: And Nand Kumar was a native who rose to a status of a Diwan and was referred to as Raja
[Guest]: and he became very rich.
[Guest]: And he made allegations against Hastings, corruption allegations against Hastings, which
[Guest]: was absolutely true.
[Guest]: At that point of time, it was true.
[Guest]: But to cut him to size, Hastings and M. Pei colluded and they accused him of forgery.
[Guest]: And like I said, forgery was punishable with death.
[Guest]: So they got together and it was a farce of a trial.
[Guest]: He did not receive proper legal representation.
[Guest]: He did not allow the proper lawyers or he was not allowed to plead his case properly.
[Guest]: The evidence was murky at best.
[Guest]: And they got together to kill him.
[Guest]: To be honest, if I can just put it that way, they got together to kill him.
[Guest]: I mean, he was convicted for forgery and he was sentenced to death.
[Guest]: It was referred to as a judicial murder, which raised uproar even back in London.
[Guest]: The parliament talked about it.
[Guest]: Even in India, there was this popular sympathy for Nand Kumar for what he was going through.
[Guest]: And actually showed at that point of time that there was a technical aspect involved
[Guest]: within Nand Kumar could be even tried under British laws.
[Guest]: Because like I said, he was a native who did not live in Calcutta.
[Guest]: He was from Murshidabad.
[Guest]: And the British law did not apply to the natives of Murshidabad.
[Guest]: So what they did was they arrested him in Calcutta.
[Guest]: And they tried him under British laws under these tyrannical laws.
[Guest]: And as a result, a lot of natives left the presidency town.
[Guest]: They just ran to these Mufsul towns, because they thought that even for a minor crime,
[Guest]: they could be executed.
[Amit Varma]: So there was an exodus from Calcutta after Nand Kumar's case.
[Amit Varma]: And since it was being discussed in parliament and Hastings, of course, was very controversial
[Unknown]: back home.
[Amit Varma]: So eventually impeached eventually impeached.
[Amit Varma]: Was there a sort of one did it lead to a great rise in disaffection among the local people?
[Amit Varma]: And to did the British themselves feel that, hey, we got to, you know, chill out a bit
[Guest]: and get this under control.
[Guest]: So Hastings and MP, they were instrumentalities of the British crown, the East India Company
[Guest]: as such the other officers of the East India Company were more sympathetic to Nand Kumar.
[Guest]: So in fact, there was a huge conflict between company officers and these British instrumentalities.
[Guest]: Now, when that happened, they actually did realize that there was an exodus of the natives
[Amit Varma]: from Calcutta from Calcutta to Mufsul places.
[Guest]: So they realize that and when they when they go out people stopping revenue when if they
[Guest]: don't like you, they would rather pick up arms rather than pay revenue to you.
[Guest]: And they relied on that revenue, they relied on trade.
[Guest]: So a message was sent that this shouldn't have been done.
[Guest]: A message was sent across Hastings was eventually recalled.
[Guest]: So yes, there were definitely was conflict.
[Guest]: And it did subsist for some time.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, there was no India as such then.
[Guest]: So there was no unity as such.
[Guest]: So it was more like a dispute between Nand Kumar and the crown than anything else.
[Guest]: So people eventually got around.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So it's just, you know, new cycles.
[Unknown]: Just like today, people move on to outrage about something else.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's kind of, you know, before we sort of dive into the 19th century in India and
[Amit Varma]: the birth of the IPC, let's, you know, you have a chapter in your book about Bentham
[Amit Varma]: Mill and Macaulay and the impact that they had on British law, especially Bentham and
[Amit Varma]: his impact on British law.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've spoken about English law, and you've spoken about English law as basically
[Amit Varma]: something that has evolved through this process of spontaneous order and has come down through
[Amit Varma]: the years, a common law system.
[Amit Varma]: And then, but Bentham is a seminal figure and how it evolves.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So Bentham is a person who is responsible for the term codification.
[Guest]: So in fact, let me correct you there.
[Guest]: Bentham did not have that big an influence on English laws than he had on other countries
[Guest]: laws, mostly on French law.
[Guest]: He had a huge influence on French law, then that which extended to the colony of Louisiana
[Guest]: and America, which was governed by the French back then.
[Guest]: So his influence actually was more on French and Indian law than English law because the
[Guest]: English still don't have a criminal code.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's an interesting quote in your book about how Bentham saying that he's a
[Amit Varma]: royalist in England, but a Republican in France.
[Guest]: So Bentham lived through the revolution there.
[Guest]: So Bentham is a very interesting character.
[Guest]: Bentham opposed, he was a rebel of the day.
[Guest]: He was not like a glamorous rebel, but he was a intellectual rebel.
[Guest]: There was this gentleman called Blackstone.
[Guest]: We still read Blackstone's law dictionary in India and everywhere across the world.
[Guest]: So Blackstone was considered an authoritative figure on criminal law and Bentham completely
[Guest]: disagreed with him.
[Guest]: And he said that I would, he actually said things like, I want to burn the statutes of
[Guest]: England.
[Guest]: I want to burn this law down and build something new.
[Guest]: And he did not find popular acceptance in England.
[Guest]: So he actually went to France, he was depressed, he went to France and he built on that, his
[Guest]: philosophy there, like for the greatest, the greater good for everyone, the greater utilitarian
[Guest]: philosophy.
[Guest]: And that's where codification began.
[Guest]: Bentham himself wasn't very successful, if I can say so, but his followers, his disciples
[Guest]: are more successful than him.
[Guest]: Because they actually put this to work.
[Guest]: Like Mill was a Bentham follower, Macaulay not so much, even though he does borrow from
[Guest]: Bentham, but he was not like a Benthamite as much as Mill was.
[Guest]: But eventually the system of codification was something which Bentham envisaged.
[Guest]: And today we are actually having the benefit of that.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the rationale behind codification?
[Amit Varma]: Like why did Bentham feel that he wanted to burn all that there was before and that codification
[Amit Varma]: was, I mean, you spoke of burning and there's an aside that in 1953, Ambedkar said that
[Amit Varma]: looking at what the constitution has become today, I feel like burning it.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: But which is completely unrelated to all of this and not seditious in the least.
[Amit Varma]: So to get back to my question about Bentham, what was it about law as it then was in England
[Amit Varma]: that he wanted to burn and what was the necessity?
[Amit Varma]: What was the rationale for needing to codify something?
[Guest]: So if laws are not codified, it leads to confusion.
[Guest]: It leads to uncertainty.
[Guest]: We are lucky we got the IPC.
[Guest]: I am saying so.
[Guest]: We are very lucky we got the IPC.
[Guest]: It's a great gift from the English to us.
[Guest]: In the sense of the concept of codification, what the code itself is, you can debate.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: The concept of codification was excellent for India because we are very diverse.
[Guest]: We had different traditions, customs across the country.
[Guest]: Like I said, indigenous laws are completely different.
[Guest]: Someone in the kingdom of Travancore or Mysore might have something completely different
[Guest]: for Thaib, which may be different in the central provinces.
[Guest]: And there are certain things, maybe offenses in one part, not an offense in another part.
[Guest]: So it was very important to have a uniform system of penal law.
[Guest]: Everyone needed to be on the same page where they knew what they can do and what they could
[Guest]: not do.
[Guest]: That is where codification becomes important.
[Guest]: Without a code, you would have 100 different statutes in 100 different parts.
[Guest]: And then there's some overlap, then there's confusion.
[Guest]: So at the end of the day, for certainty in law, you need a code.
[Guest]: So India has the civil procedure code, the criminal procedure code, which the criminal
[Guest]: procedure code came later after the IPC was enacted and CPC also came later.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, these codes have had a major impact or rather they've shaped
[Guest]: the Indian judicial system.
[Guest]: Procedure is derived from the criminal procedure and the civil procedure codes.
[Guest]: Penal offenses are derived from the IPC.
[Guest]: Now we have penal offenses, other statutes as well, but there's no overlap in many cases.
[Guest]: Most cases there's no overlap.
[Guest]: In certain cases, there may be overlap, but then they're very, very specific in nature.
[Guest]: Like you were just discussing about the UAPA and IPC.
[Guest]: Like UAPA is very specific in nature.
[Guest]: That's why as opposed to 124, which is general in nature.
[Guest]: So but at the end of the day, mostly we have certainty, which was how a code becomes helpful
[Amit Varma]: in India or anywhere else.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, you're saying the importance of a code basically is that the rule of law
[Amit Varma]: needs to be both transparent and accountable and predictable.
[Amit Varma]: And once you have a specific code out there, everyone knows what the rules of the game
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But England doesn't have a code.
[Guest]: Yes, England doesn't have a code and they suffered because of it for a very long time.
[Guest]: There was a lot of confusion because of common law.
[Guest]: I don't consider myself an authority on that.
[Guest]: But broadly from what I've researched, there was no certain consistency in law, which they
[Guest]: have remediated to a certain extent now, because earlier there were no statutes as such also.
[Guest]: Now there are specific statutes for certain things.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, like a money laundering or a bribery has a separate statute, money
[Guest]: laundering has a separate statute, offense against the state has a separate statute.
[Guest]: So they have these separate statutes for these specific laws, but they haven't brought it
[Guest]: together.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of get back to Bentham.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of his protgs was James Mill.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out, you know, through his 40s, and then gradually as he turns 50, he
[Amit Varma]: becomes sort of the, you know, one of the key bureaucrats in charge of India who sort
[Amit Varma]: of looking into Indian affairs.
[Amit Varma]: And he sort of influences the birth of the IPC in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that and the role he played.
[Guest]: So Mill was in India house and he was responsible for communication between the East India Company
[Guest]: and the parliament.
[Guest]: He was sort of a go between and a very important go between.
[Guest]: In fact, he wrote, which he himself calls a seminal history of India, but he had never
[Guest]: been to India.
[Guest]: So historians have a lot of problem with his history, but he did write a history of India
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: So he was coming here.
[Guest]: In fact, you have a long snide remark by Macaulay on his history.
[Guest]: So and Macaulay and Mill, in fact, didn't get along at all.
[Guest]: Macaulay very, very famously in parliament when the reforms were going, the charter reforms
[Guest]: were happening, he made very, very accusatory statements about Mill saying that this person
[Guest]: does not even know the, he has never been to the country, doesn't know history, but
[Guest]: he's written a book on history on Indian law.
[Guest]: And it's very interesting because when they decided to form the first law commission,
[Guest]: they wanted to send someone there and Macaulay and the East India Company did not get along
[Guest]: again because he was a member of parliament, a very young one at that.
[Guest]: He was in his early thirties, was in his early thirties.
[Guest]: And he used to criticize the East India Company about everything that they were doing in India.
[Guest]: So, and Mill also did not get along with Macaulay.
[Guest]: So it was very surprising that when they eventually had the reforms, then the chart, 1830s, the
[Guest]: charter reforms happened and they decided to have the first law commission and they
[Guest]: asked for Mill who they should appoint as the first law commissioner, he recommended
[Guest]: Macaulay, despite having all his differences with him.
[Guest]: And it was not taken well by the company.
[Guest]: So Mill actually had to convince the directors to send Macaulay and their relationship improved
[Guest]: after that, they prepared after that.
[Guest]: It's very interesting that two people on the opposite ends of an issue work together to
[Guest]: get us the court.
[Guest]: Why did he want Macaulay?
[Guest]: Because he had a lot of belief in Macaulay's intellectual capacity.
[Guest]: And he respected Macaulay for that.
[Guest]: Personally, they may have animosity, but he respected Macaulay for his intellectual capacity.
[Amit Varma]: And what was Macaulay's approach to like 1833, the commission was set up to sort of draft
[Amit Varma]: the IPC.
[Amit Varma]: He took around four years to do it and working practically alone, as you point out, without
[Amit Varma]: any assistant.
[Amit Varma]: What was his approach given that he's not exactly writing on a blank slate?
[Amit Varma]: Because India, though it's not India then, but India as it is, then the lands that he's
[Amit Varma]: making this legal code for is like you pointed out, so diverse, they have so many different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of customs and traditions and peoples and ways of doing things.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the sort of unifying principles which he brings to bear on that?
[Guest]: So like I said, we had regulations then so it was not really a clean slate.
[Guest]: But he had a major issue with those regulations.
[Guest]: And in his notes, he mentions that there's not a lot of popular support for a penal code
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: That is one of the reasons why the code did not come into effect for 30 years after it
[Guest]: was originally drafted.
[Guest]: So when he was looking at the law in his notes, he mentions when he was sending it to Auckland
[Guest]: for his consideration, he mentions that he's studied other indigenous laws, he studied
[Guest]: these regulations, and he feels that he does not have anything to refer to, to create these
[Guest]: laws.
[Guest]: He feels that nothing is reliable.
[Guest]: So he actually goes back on old English laws and common law in place there.
[Guest]: And that is why I said that it's not technically a code because this is not something which
[Guest]: was brought together.
[Guest]: It's not a product of bringing together of Indian laws, indigenous laws.
[Guest]: It's a foreign product at the end of the day.
[Amit Varma]: So typically, a code would be that you take a bunch of existing laws and you make sense
[Guest]: of them rationalize them.
[Guest]: Just put it in a box.
[Guest]: This is almost sui generis.
[Guest]: He's having to come up with...
[Guest]: He had to come up with a lot of things.
[Guest]: And that too without help.
[Guest]: Like I said, almost all the members were sick or back in England or just did not do any
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Amit Varma]: So what are his guiding principles?
[Amit Varma]: He of course was an influence, I guess, the whole utilitarian funda is there.
[Amit Varma]: But what are his guiding principles otherwise?
[Guest]: His guiding principle mostly was proportionality and certainty.
[Guest]: He wanted that.
[Guest]: And he wanted clear categories of offenses to be created.
[Guest]: If you look at the draft code, it's arranged in a way in which if you're talking about
[Guest]: laws against the human body, then they all club together like we have in the IPC today.
[Guest]: It comes from there.
[Guest]: So he wanted extreme clarity as far as application of penal laws was concerned.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you sum it up very nicely where by quoting McCauley when McCauley says about
[Amit Varma]: the IPC quote, our principle is simply this uniformity where you can have it diversity
[Amit Varma]: where you must have it.
[Amit Varma]: But in all cases, certainty, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this principle was new at the time and is still the driving force.
[Guest]: It is the driving force, driving force for most laws in India today, that we have to
[Amit Varma]: have certainty as far as laws are concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a short commercial break now and let's come back and talk more about McCauley
[Amit Varma]: and colonial India.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another great week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Also like to thank Intel and Storytel for supporting us this month.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, Amit is joined by author and advocate Chitranshul Sinha.
[Unknown]: They talk about the historical background of the sedition law and discuss Chitranshul's
[Unknown]: book The Great Repression.
[Unknown]: On the origin of things, Chuck narrates a story about a man who revolutionized the concept
[Unknown]: of fuel in Brazil through the Great Depression and World War Two.
[Unknown]: On edges and sledges, the guys talk about the T20 match between India and Bangladesh.
[Unknown]: On Geekfruit, Tejas and Dinkar are joined by the IBM producer Abbas.
[Unknown]: They talk about the new Terminator film Dark Fate and the past and future of the franchise.
[Unknown]: On Football Shootball, we have an exciting episode as our hosts discuss the aftermath
[Unknown]: of the biggest game of the season, Liverpool vs Manchester City.
[Unknown]: It's a Children's Day special on IBM Lives as Madhuri, Alika, Rithika and Abbas talk about
[Unknown]: pop culture they consumed as children and reflect on how they perceive it now.
[Unknown]: On GayBCD, Sunetra and Farhad share the list of their firsts from their first kiss to their
[Unknown]: first queer experience to the first time queer representation and art moved them.
[Unknown]: It's a list you definitely don't want to miss.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach, Ashton talks about measuring and visualizing the progress of our habits
[Unknown]: with the help of paperclips.
[Unknown]: On the season finale of Keeping It Queer, Naveen and Farhad discuss their understanding
[Unknown]: of a breakup and how to get over them with maturity.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen, I'm chatting with Chitranshul Sinha about his
[Amit Varma]: excellent book The Great Repression, the story of sedition in India.
[Amit Varma]: And we've just spent 40 minutes talking not about sedition per se, but other general matters.
[Amit Varma]: So now we get the first glimpse of sedition in the draft IPC, which is created by Macaulay.
[Amit Varma]: And this is clause 113 of the draft code, which basically I'll just read out this bit
[Amit Varma]: very similar to what later became the sedition law.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representation,
[Amit Varma]: attempts to excite feelings of this affection to the government established by law in the
[Amit Varma]: territories of the East India Company among any class of people who live under that government
[Amit Varma]: shall be punished with banishment for life or any other term from the territories of
[Amit Varma]: the East India Company, to which fine may be added or with simple imprisonment for a
[Amit Varma]: term which may extend to three years to which fine may be added or with fine.
[Amit Varma]: Stop code that was one sentence.
[Guest]: Yeah, you lawyers really love your clauses.
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: That's how we earn our money because no one else understands it.
[Amit Varma]: So did you did you while while you were writing this book, which is written in extremely readable
[Amit Varma]: and interesting language, did you have to stop yourself from putting clauses in long
[Guest]: sentences many times?
[Guest]: Many many times I had to control I had to unlearn whatever I had ever learned to write
[Guest]: this book.
[Guest]: And even to read the law, I had to stop many times to understand what they had originally
[Amit Varma]: written.
[Amit Varma]: So were you you know, just to continue with this brief digression, were you did you like
[Amit Varma]: to write before this?
[Amit Varma]: Did you ever think of yourself as a future writer?
[Guest]: Oh, yes, I did.
[Guest]: Always.
[Guest]: I always thought of myself as a novelist.
[Guest]: I had these stupid novel ideas in my head.
[Guest]: There was since I was in school, but that never happened.
[Guest]: So you would write Yeah, I used to edit my the college law review and I started writing
[Guest]: articles for digital publications two years back.
[Guest]: And yes, I would write and I always loved writing and reading but I never thought that
[Guest]: I would write a book so soon and that too on a legal history topic.
[Guest]: I always thought my first book would be a novel but sadly it was not.
[Amit Varma]: The first book reads like a novel.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit now this is the first glimpse of the sedition law and the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing I found from your book is that you know Britain did not have a sedition law.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you write court rather than have a single offense called sedition.
[Amit Varma]: Seditious offenses were categorized as seditious words, seditious labels and seditious conspiracies.
[Amit Varma]: Subcourt and yet the need for it was felt in India.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about why that is so.
[Guest]: So I'll just go back a little bit.
[Guest]: Why this is important is that you have to understand how this law was born in England
[Guest]: till the 13th century.
[Guest]: There was no uniformity of government or no uniformity of control or even the crown wasn't
[Guest]: respected.
[Guest]: The crown was essentially just seen as a useful instrument of organization not more than that
[Guest]: and the state and the crown actually feared any uprising.
[Guest]: They wanted their own safety and they wanted to be loved and respected.
[Guest]: So this law is very very literal in a sense that you couldn't say anything against them.
[Guest]: When it started it was essentially to protect the church from criticism because we all know
[Guest]: that that history is tainted and even the state wanted to be protected from criticism
[Guest]: because I've also mentioned it in the book that in fact the queen at the time was stoned
[Guest]: by people when she was going to the tower and that's when they started prosecuting people
[Amit Varma]: for it.
[Amit Varma]: And when Chitranshul says stoned by people, he does not mean she was given drugs or made
[Amit Varma]: to smoke weed.
[Amit Varma]: She was literally stoned.
[Amit Varma]: This is a family podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: I mean, I don't know what you're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, it's interesting because you know, you talk about the 13th century and about
[Amit Varma]: how we think today with the benefit of hindsight of England as this largely homogenous people.
[Amit Varma]: But actually there were different people.
[Amit Varma]: You had the Normans and the Saxons and the Celts and all of that sort of fighting for
[Amit Varma]: dominance and therefore for the centralizing authority that cropped up in the shape of
[Amit Varma]: the king and especially Edward the first who was like you point out of a legislative bent.
[Amit Varma]: There was an importance to have laws which would keep these people in check.
[Amit Varma]: And that is perhaps the birth of what you call clause 34 of the statute of Westminster.
[Guest]: Yes, because what happened was that because of these, this heterogeneous population of
[Guest]: England, they did not even have uniformity of language like we, we don't realize this,
[Guest]: but they did not speak English back then.
[Guest]: So they did not have uniformity of language or culture.
[Guest]: So when these people got together, they literally formed an alliance because they were tired
[Guest]: of warring.
[Guest]: They're tired of spending all the resources on fighting with each other.
[Guest]: So say they decided that they should come together and live as a people as a nation.
[Guest]: But even then they were bound to be differences like, like in India, the different classes,
[Guest]: different communities, they're still friction.
[Guest]: So that friction, which originated that union, union, which originated in war had a lot of
[Guest]: friction.
[Guest]: So a Saxon king would not be loved or respected by the Celts and vice versa.
[Guest]: So that is why I keep saying that this was a very, very literal law.
[Guest]: You just couldn't say anything doesn't matter.
[Guest]: If you say the king killed his wife, even if he had actually killed his wife, he, the
[Guest]: person who says the king killed his wife would be prosecuted for seditious libel.
[Amit Varma]: It would not be a defense as indeed it wasn't at one stage of 124A.
[Amit Varma]: I want to read out at last 24 of the statute of Westminster of 1275, just so that you can
[Amit Varma]: appreciate Macaulay who I earlier quoted a little bit more.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, for as much as there have been often times found in the country, divisors of tales
[Amit Varma]: whereby the scourge or occasion of the scourge has many times arisen between the king and
[Amit Varma]: his people or great men of this realm for the damage that hath and may therefore ensue.
[Amit Varma]: It is commanded that from henceforth none be so hardy to cite or publish any false news
[Amit Varma]: or tales whereby the scourge or slander may grow between the king and his people or the
[Amit Varma]: great men of his realm.
[Amit Varma]: And he that doth so shall be taken and kept in prison until he hath brought him into the
[Amit Varma]: court, which was the first author of the tale.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is basically you can sum this law up in three words, right?
[Amit Varma]: No fake news.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, not even fake news.
[Guest]: Don't say anything against the church or the state.
[Guest]: Even if it's real, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: You can't call a priest a pedophile, even if he's a pedophile.
[Guest]: It was as simple as that.
[Guest]: In fact, that sounds sounds a lot like Shakespeare and like Shakespeare, a lot of people, I'm
[Guest]: sure they don't understand it then as they don't understand it now.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, it was very simple.
[Amit Varma]: Don't say anything against the establishment.
[Amit Varma]: I'll correct you there.
[Amit Varma]: And this has nothing to do with the subject of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But Shakespeare actually like I teach this course for Takshashila on how to write op-eds
[Amit Varma]: and one of the one of my little modules there is about how Shakespeare would write great
[Amit Varma]: public policy, because he most of his plays are written in iambic pentameter.
[Amit Varma]: Iambic, of course, is the stress non stress alternative way of speaking kind of.
[Amit Varma]: But pentameter was that you basically have broadly speaking five units of two syllables
[Amit Varma]: each 10 syllables in a sentence, because that is how much we can speak without needing to
[Amit Varma]: pause.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: And his sentences were his language was written in such a way that actors would find it easy
[Amit Varma]: to say.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you will not find a single sentence in Shakespeare, which is as long
[Guest]: as the one I read out.
[Guest]: So for your Twitter audience, this is a hashtag TIL moment for me to hear that Shakespeare
[Amit Varma]: actually was a beautifully elegant writer.
[Amit Varma]: And let's let's get back to the subject at hand, which is so there is this law which
[Amit Varma]: aims to protect.
[Amit Varma]: You've also pointed out the distinction between two kinds of laws, which is that there are
[Amit Varma]: laws which protect you from other citizens, which are meant to stop citizens harming other
[Amit Varma]: citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And there are laws which are meant to protect the state.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And and this is sort of in the category of that.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly apart from this, as English law evolves and common law happens, there is really
[Amit Varma]: no equivalent to the sedition law that's coming up.
[Guest]: See, I'll just add to what I was saying first.
[Guest]: So the all these statutes which are created to act as a protection of the states from
[Guest]: its people is because there was a lot of chaos.
[Guest]: There was there was fear of overthrow every day.
[Guest]: And that's how this law, in fact, became a terrible tool, because tomorrow, a criticism
[Guest]: could be seen as an encouragement of to the masses to rise against the king.
[Guest]: What I meant was that that there was no law on sedition.
[Guest]: Now, sedition is a broad category.
[Guest]: Sedition is just an umbrella term that's being used.
[Guest]: Sedition can be of various types, like it can be liable where you publish or speak against
[Guest]: us, speak seditious.
[Amit Varma]: So these categories, these categories and seditious conspiracy was more about these
[Guest]: violent acts which would take place, seditious acts which would take place.
[Guest]: So by saying there's no equivalent, yes, because Indian law uses the umbrella term.
[Guest]: But in fact, it was better to have these categories like instead of having a law against sedition,
[Guest]: a more ideal situation could have been a law against sedition, seditious libel, a separate
[Guest]: provision for seditious conspiracy, because today we club everything together.
[Guest]: And the punishment is the same for saying something or actually causing an uprising.
[Amit Varma]: So yes, that equivalence doesn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in one of the things that you keep talking about in your book and demonstrating
[Amit Varma]: in your book is that you can't just look at laws in isolation, you see them in the political
[Amit Varma]: context of the time, the social context of the time.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, Macaulay between 33 and 37 works on this code, he gets it out, but
[Amit Varma]: then it's kind of stuck in the bureaucracy and is being debated back and forth.
[Amit Varma]: And like you pointed out, Bethune does an alternative version of it and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But then a strong impetus is given to it by circumstances, which is basically the revolt
[Amit Varma]: of 1857.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit about that?
[Amit Varma]: You know how the British crown then had to take command and then therefore needed a penal
[Guest]: code and hey, this was it.
[Guest]: So yeah, so 1857, as you know, was the, they called it the first war of independence, but
[Guest]: it was more an organized mutiny across the country.
[Guest]: So and it again was on mostly on religious grounds.
[Guest]: And I don't need to really go into that as such.
[Guest]: So they had a makeshift law, when the mutiny happened, they got a makeshift law in where
[Guest]: they provided for an offense against the state that which is somewhat, I won't say similar
[Guest]: to sedition, but it was the first step towards having a law against sedition where you can't
[Guest]: criticize the government or say anything against the government and it had to be tried.
[Guest]: And there was a summary trial with no appeal provided if you did something like that.
[Guest]: So when the mutiny ended, and it's called the 1857 revolution, but at the end of the
[Guest]: day, it went on till 1858 and 1859, it finally ended in around 1859.
[Guest]: And that's when in 1860, the new law comes in.
[Guest]: But when the crown took over, they realized that they have to establish themselves and
[Guest]: they have to stop this from happening again.
[Guest]: So that's when they tested the draft code and they handed it over to Barnes Peacock
[Guest]: to write it again and to make it a better law as such, define it a little more.
[Guest]: So the penal code was an exercise in having a unified penal provision, unified penal provisions
[Guest]: in India to control the masses and to avoid another 1857 from happening.
[Guest]: So that is how the crown wanted to assert itself.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that there are two sort of simultaneous imperatives here, which is
[Amit Varma]: driving the British to sort of impose this penal code and one is of course, to protect
[Amit Varma]: themselves and to control the people.
[Amit Varma]: But the other also is a transformative one to sort of to bring about social change, which
[Amit Varma]: is something you know, even Macaulay, for example, is notorious for having spoken about
[Amit Varma]: the civilizing impulse of empire and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So does the IPC sort of contain reflect both of these imperatives?
[Guest]: Yes, it does.
[Guest]: In fact, I would be amiss to mention that Macaulay as such wasn't your ideal administrator.
[Guest]: His philosophies that have find origin racist thought.
[Guest]: He like you mentioned, he wanted to civilize the masses, the education system that he brought
[Guest]: about in the country that was also to civilize the masses.
[Guest]: So there was a racist bone in his body.
[Guest]: But so the law sort of even if you look at like the law of adultery, like women were
[Guest]: treated as shattered as property, thankfully, that laws gone now.
[Guest]: So only a man would be punished for adultery, not the woman who participated in that act.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the man who slept with the wife of someone else would basically be prosecuted
[Guest]: for theft because he was taking yes, the property was the wife's was this is a Victorian law.
[Guest]: We did not have such a concept in India back then.
[Guest]: So he wanted that concept to be brought in.
[Guest]: He wanted that was a complete that was foreign to us.
[Guest]: He wanted that to be brought in because then you elevate or rather denigrate a woman to
[Guest]: a status of property.
[Guest]: Similarly like social reform, if you say that they wanted to reform and in fact, the great
[Guest]: leaders of the day like Tilak also, they did not oppose it in principle.
[Guest]: He personally did not oppose it in principle, but he thought that it should be left to the
[Guest]: natives to the Hindus to do it themselves, do a reform, have awareness program like about
[Guest]: the age of consent bill, where there's this tradition of which was the Garbhdan that on
[Guest]: the first night itself, the child bride would sleep with the man and it didn't matter he
[Guest]: was 30 or 40.
[Guest]: And there was a death which happened because of that.
[Guest]: Now, people did not react well to these changes.
[Guest]: And these changes were brought, they tried to impose these changes through legislation,
[Guest]: which was alien for people back then.
[Guest]: So there was the like you said, they did try to civilize the masses if I may use their
[Guest]: language rather than our language.
[Guest]: They did want to civilize the masses through these laws.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's best used in inverted quotes, because the transformative effect that they
[Amit Varma]: wanted to have sort of seemed to me to fail in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: In one, of course, they are imposing Victorian values on India, which you could say are actually
[Amit Varma]: a step backwards from where we are.
[Amit Varma]: And two, even when they are trying to bring about positive social change, the point of
[Amit Varma]: Tilak, and this is a classic conservative criticism, which many others, I mean, Tilak,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think was a classic conservative, but the criticism itself is very Burkean is
[Amit Varma]: that you cannot change society in a top down way, you have to change it from within, you
[Guest]: have to change the culture and just having a law doesn't.
[Guest]: So in fact, it's very interesting.
[Guest]: So Tilak did not actually oppose this reform, but what he said was that you should make
[Guest]: people take a pledge that they will not force their girls into marriage at 10 or they will
[Guest]: not force their girls to do garbhdan on the first night and none of his fellow reformers
[Guest]: nobody wanted to do that.
[Guest]: Nobody wanted to take that pledge.
[Guest]: He said, no, first you may create awareness, you make people do this voluntarily don't
[Guest]: impose it on them.
[Guest]: So Tilak while approaching this from a conservative place, he was not against reform, but he knew
[Guest]: the reality of the day that people will not accept this.
[Guest]: If let's say someone like Tilak would have initiated the idea, people would have been
[Guest]: more welcoming of it.
[Guest]: But because the idea did not come from Tilak, it came from the British.
[Guest]: So anyway, resentment had started that was the period when actual resentment against
[Guest]: the government had started.
[Guest]: It was where the, I would say the freedom movement had started taking form, not the
[Guest]: freedom movement, I said with anti British movement had started taking form.
[Guest]: So they thought there is a foreign influence.
[Guest]: Why should we listen to foreign influence?
[Guest]: Why should we listen to these people who not even from here?
[Guest]: Why should we listen to the white skin people?
[Guest]: So Tilak was right in a way that it has to come from within.
[Guest]: But yes, people generally averse to these reforms.
[Guest]: Even Sati was opposed.
[Guest]: If you think about it today, I for the life of me can't imagine why it was opposed.
[Guest]: Like I don't know why it was opposed.
[Guest]: Yes, customs, religion, everything.
[Guest]: But to kill someone just because their husband is dead, doesn't sound sound nice to me today.
[Guest]: But at that time, it was opposed because it was the British who brought it.
[Guest]: So it was more and more resistance to foreign reforms than reforms themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I had Jerry Rao on my show last week talking about Indian conservatism.
[Amit Varma]: And his point about conservatism, I think would be that conservatives aren't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: opposed to reform, but they are very concerned about the manner of reform that if you try
[Amit Varma]: to impose it in a top down way or try to do it radically, things can go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, my counter argument to that is that for something like Sati, you have to
[Amit Varma]: be animated by first principles that taking someone's life is wrong, coercion is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't then wait for society to change once you have figured out that these are your
[Amit Varma]: values.
[Amit Varma]: So people could argue that not everyone shares those values.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the interesting thing about the IPC when it's accepted, I think first Jan 1862 is when
[Amit Varma]: it comes into effect, is that at that point in time, that sedition law is not there.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, it's whether it's an oversight or whatever, you know, it's it's slipped through
[Guest]: the cracks, basically.
[Unknown]: That's what they say.
[Guest]: We will never know why.
[Guest]: There's no literature on why it was not in the Indian Penal Code.
[Guest]: There's no literature, they blame it on carelessness or they blame it on oversight, but we will
[Guest]: maybe we'll never know why it was not brought in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: But very soon there is, as you describe in your book, a movement to sort of bring the
[Amit Varma]: sedition law back.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things driving it, which might be a TIL for many people listening to the
[Amit Varma]: show is a Wahhabi movement, the growing Wahhabi movement in India, which is, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: this is really before the organized freedom movement in India really takes birth.
[Amit Varma]: And the Wahhabi movement is the chief sort of circumstance, which makes the British think
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, we've got a bunch of laws after 1857 to keep the natives in check.
[Amit Varma]: But we need more, we need the sedition law.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit.
[Guest]: So the Wahhabi, the Indian Wahhabism does not find its origin in Saudi Wahhabism.
[Guest]: Indian Wahhabism finds its origin in in Uttar Pradesh of all places, like Bareilly.
[Guest]: And so the Wahhabis at the time of the mutiny in 1857, they in fact did not participate
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: They were not nationalistic.
[Guest]: They were communal.
[Guest]: They did not want a India without the British.
[Guest]: They wanted an Islamic India.
[Guest]: So they sort of stayed away from the movement.
[Guest]: So they actually did not play any role in it, maybe a minor role here and there, but
[Guest]: they did not play any role in it.
[Guest]: But after that ended and before it happened, they, earlier they fought, they were fighting
[Guest]: the Sikhs, then the Sikhs were defeated by the British and there's again, they refocused
[Guest]: on the British.
[Guest]: They wanted to just drive away outsiders from the country and create a Islamic nation.
[Guest]: So after 1857, there were a lot of conspiracies from across the country, from the Bengal presence,
[Guest]: from Dhaka to Punjab.
[Guest]: And this was discovered over a period of time and there were major trials which happened
[Guest]: that happened in Ambala, in Patna, and Delhi, and Wahhabi leaders executed, but they just
[Guest]: refused to die down.
[Guest]: So they actually felt that they need this against the Wahhabis because they could not
[Guest]: deal with another uprising that close to the mutiny.
[Guest]: So that is the most proximate cause for Section 124A being enacted.
[Amit Varma]: So Section 124A comes back and it's also very interesting that you talk about two preventive
[Amit Varma]: laws to supplement Section 124A.
[Amit Varma]: The first you point out is a Dramatic Performances Act of 1876, which is, quote, intended to
[Amit Varma]: prevent performances of seditious, defamatory or scandalous nature, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, all of that is open to interpretation and anything can be and you point out very
[Amit Varma]: interestingly in the title of this play could be really modern.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about this play called Chai Ka Darpan, which was a proximate cause for the enactment
[Amit Varma]: of the law because Chai Ka Darpan was a play that portrayed owners, quote, portrayed owners
[Amit Varma]: of tea plantations and promoters of migration to tea growing districts as evil persons who
[Amit Varma]: exploited migrants both physically and sexually, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out in one of the witticisms that, pepper your book, if there is one rule
[Amit Varma]: you don't break, it's that you do not mess with the Englishman's tea.
[Guest]: So these plantations which were across Assam, Bengal, they sort of fed England, the tea
[Guest]: went from here.
[Guest]: But a lot of exploitation was happening on these plantations.
[Guest]: Migrant labor was being badly exploited.
[Guest]: Number one, we were subjects and number two, they were even the financial overlords.
[Guest]: So it was rather a communist movement, if I may say so, that people got together and
[Guest]: they started writing and writing plays and performing plays where they criticize all
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: So the British government was spurred into action because one play, there were other
[Guest]: plays also and other poetry and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: There is a play, Chai Ka Darpan exists?
[Guest]: So I couldn't locate it myself, but yeah, this play existed and they had to ban it.
[Amit Varma]: So what I meant was, have you read it?
[Guest]: No, no, I couldn't find the text of the play.
[Guest]: I had to glean it from the trials and from the history of the law and the speeches which
[Guest]: were delivered before that act was brought in.
[Guest]: So when that happened, that's when these laws came in to supplement the laws that, okay,
[Guest]: fine, we have a general law, but let's have these laws also separately.
[Amit Varma]: And the other law, which I also found interesting, the other preventive law was the Vernacular
[Amit Varma]: Press Act of 1878, which was, quote, enacted to place newspapers published in local languages
[Amit Varma]: under the control of the government for repressing seditious writings, which are intended to
[Amit Varma]: produce disaffection towards the government in the mind of natives, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And when I was reading this, it kind of struck me that we don't have that law today.
[Amit Varma]: But effectively, the same kind of pressures and incentives can still apply.
[Amit Varma]: You still, for example, no FM radio station will ever dare to talk about politics or broadcast
[Amit Varma]: actual news because their license could be taken away.
[Amit Varma]: Or for that matter, you know, different kinds of pressure can be put on all kinds of publications
[Amit Varma]: because a lot of publications depend on government advertising for their revenues.
[Amit Varma]: So these pools and pressures still exist, except that there is really no need of a law
[Guest]: to sort of make it happen.
[Guest]: It can be controlled economically rather than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's talk about the first sedition case now and which of 1891.
[Amit Varma]: And before we talk about the first sedition case, and it's very interesting how what dovetails
[Amit Varma]: into this is one of their, you know, the British again trying to bring about social change
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: And there is obviously you point out that girls are being married as young as 10 years
[Amit Varma]: old and, you know, expected to conceive very soon.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about this child, right, called full money, who was 10 years old in 1889,
[Amit Varma]: married off to a man named Hari Mohan Mehti, who was over 30 years of age, and he has sex
[Amit Varma]: with her and she dies that night itself.
[Amit Varma]: He's charged for her rape and murder.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads to the coinage of the term Hari Mehtism, which I must confess, I haven't
[Amit Varma]: heard till I read your book, Hari Mehtism for the court practice of consummation of
[Amit Varma]: marriage with child rights, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And he's acquitted because the law against rape does not apply to the marital rape of
[Amit Varma]: a girl of 10 years of age.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, the British government enacts the age of consent act of 18 March
[Amit Varma]: 1891, which raises the age of consent from 10 to 12.
[Guest]: So that was a huge leap of two years.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody goes nuts.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So again, like I said, reforms for being resisted, and the Bengali intelligentsia, which is a
[Guest]: bongo bashi that took up issues with it and wrote severe editorials against this reform,
[Guest]: saying that the British come in and they're touching our Hindu cults terms and traditions,
[Guest]: they're destroying everything.
[Guest]: And they say, if these if this keeps happening, we'll have to throw them out.
[Guest]: I'm just, I'm paraphrasing everything.
[Amit Varma]: I'll read that bit out where a translated extract of the first offending article which
[Amit Varma]: was cited in the case goes, quote, the English ruler is our Lord and Master and can interfere
[Amit Varma]: with our religion and usages by brute force and European civilization.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindu is powerless to resist, but he is superior to your nation and good morals in
[Amit Varma]: gentle conduct and in good education, Hindu civilization and the Hindu religion are in
[Amit Varma]: danger of being destroyed.
[Amit Varma]: The Englishman stands revealed in his true colors.
[Amit Varma]: He has a rifle and bayonet and slanders the Hindu from the might of the gun.
[Amit Varma]: How are we to conciliate him?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And when I read this, I thought, ki Englishman ke jaga mein elites dal do.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Unknown]: And it still applies.
[Unknown]: This seems very, very familiar.
[Unknown]: Doesn't it sound familiar?
[Unknown]: Yeah, you go on social media, doesn't it sound familiar today that this is exact same thing
[Unknown]: we are seeing again, the Hindu majority is victim.
[Unknown]: Hindu khatre mein hai.
[Amit Varma]: At that time, you could say, they were sort of the victim.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, so this guy comes up with this thing that how dare you raise the age to 12,
[Unknown]: you know, what are 11 year old girls to do?
[Guest]: And I know, but but but the age for marriage were not raised.
[Guest]: Only the age for intercourse was raised.
[Guest]: So you could still have a 10 year old child bride.
[Guest]: But if you have sex with her before she turned 12, that was marital rape, which seems very
[Amit Varma]: bizarrely legalistic, because there's no actual way of whoever is implementing the law to
[Guest]: enforce it.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So they maybe they wanted to appear to be doing some good virtue signaling.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It's very interesting today that even today, there's a debate on marital rape happening.
[Guest]: That the petition spending in the Supreme Court and the High Court where they want marital
[Guest]: rape to be criminalized.
[Guest]: So in fact, British did criminalize marital rape for 10 and 11 year old girl child.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess what you could say is progress is basically the age of marital rape rising.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Jesus, I don't even know what to say.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk a bit about this sort of first case where the proprietor, editor, manager
[Amit Varma]: and printer of Bongo Bashi are all charged in a case known as Queen Empress versus Jogendra
[Amit Varma]: Chandra Bose and others.
[Amit Varma]: And others.
[Guest]: Okay, it's written.
[Guest]: O.R.S is others.
[Amit Varma]: What do I know about legal language?
[Amit Varma]: And one of the defenses, of course, is that hey, you know, we didn't kind of write it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the writer is anonymous, and he's not here.
[Amit Varma]: So don't blame us and that's kind of thrown out.
[Amit Varma]: Now the debates around the sedition law, especially the terminology, especially the word disaffection,
[Guest]: kind of start from this case where Justice Petheram.
[Guest]: Yeah, Justice Petheram.
[Amit Varma]: When I read this, I couldn't figure out if he's an Englishman.
[Unknown]: Englishman, definitely Englishman.
[Amit Varma]: So not Petheram, but Justice Petheram.
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a bit about the debate around this case and kind of what happens.
[Guest]: So what they did was that they wanted to interpret what disaffection actually means.
[Guest]: So what he said, it doesn't know what the presence of the letters DIS between affection
[Guest]: means it has to be the opposite of affection.
[Guest]: So the opposite of affection is hatred.
[Guest]: So it doesn't matter if it's a legitimate criticism.
[Guest]: If they if they if they if he asked the jury to decide whether they felt that was this
[Guest]: intended to create hatred against the government or not.
[Guest]: Doesn't matter no violence ensued, doesn't matter that it was a legitimate criticism.
[Guest]: I say legitimate because of what people felt that back then.
[Guest]: So he made a very, very literal interpretation of the term disaffection and said that hatred,
[Amit Varma]: anything to incite hatred against the government would lead to the offense of sedition.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of counter interpretation of this is that, you know, you don't that the
[Amit Varma]: word disaffection in a legal sense has evolved to mean something else.
[Amit Varma]: And the way the sedition law has also been interpreted is that merely criticizing the
[Amit Varma]: government or inspiring hatred against it isn't enough.
[Amit Varma]: You also need to incite people to specific acts of violence against it only then is it
[Guest]: sedition.
[Guest]: So that that actually happened later that happened in the 1960s.
[Guest]: Prior to that, there was no such interpretation built into the law.
[Guest]: It is actually the Supreme Court which read down the law to include this, that actual
[Guest]: incitement of hatred has to happen.
[Guest]: But before that, mere criticism which which would cause disloyalty or hatred against the
[Guest]: government was enough to be punished for sedition.
[Amit Varma]: But this is Peter M's interpretation of disaffection that there were other interpretations which
[Guest]: came up.
[Guest]: The interpretation was Morris Goyer which happened a lot later in the 1940s.
[Guest]: And he sort of said what Kedarnath judgment said eventually, that unless there's incitement
[Guest]: to violence, you can't punish a person for sedition.
[Guest]: But it was quickly set aside with the Privy Council in another case.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we'll come to that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the Tilak case.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Tilak was, you know, a member of the governor's legislative council.
[Amit Varma]: And he was a fairly big guy within local circles at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And he had this newspaper called Kesri.
[Amit Varma]: And the first case against him really comes because he seems to justify violence, especially
[Amit Varma]: in the context of Shivaji, where, you know, he essentially argues that Shivaji was justified
[Amit Varma]: in killing Afzal Khan in the way that he did that it was an act of self defense.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, to use that as an analogy against the empire, that there are modern circumstances,
[Amit Varma]: contemporary circumstances, in which case such violence may be justified.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, he was hold up for sedition.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of arguments going back and forth?
[Guest]: So what had actually happened was that there was a plague in Pune, prior to all that.
[Guest]: And a lot of people died and they were really resisting the government's effort to rescue
[Guest]: victims or to quarantine people.
[Guest]: So there was this plague commissioner Rand.
[Guest]: And so people really detested him.
[Guest]: In fact, Tilak himself had a huge hand to play in getting people to accept government
[Guest]: help getting them into hospitals, leave their homes because they were very afraid of British
[Amit Varma]: help.
[Amit Varma]: And what these Britishers were basically doing is they were coming home and if they found
[Amit Varma]: a victim, just send them off to the hospital.
[Guest]: And burn all their possessions.
[Amit Varma]: So you're having people whose homes are being invaded, their relatives being sent away to
[Amit Varma]: a hospital, and their things being burnt.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes if there's no one else at home, the houses just left like that.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So basically, that's why the natives of Pune, they felt that this was an act of aggression
[Guest]: against the local population.
[Guest]: In fact, they were trying to help them.
[Guest]: And soon after that, the Shivaji festival was, I would say it was reborn in the years
[Guest]: around that time.
[Guest]: And when he delivered the speech, sometime after that, days after that, Rand was assassinated
[Guest]: because of this plague relief work.
[Guest]: Now the British then need an excuse to catch the luck for something.
[Guest]: Even though he was a member of the legislative council, and he was a very important man,
[Guest]: but they still detested him.
[Guest]: He was seen as a power center, separate power centers.
[Guest]: Again, it was very political.
[Guest]: And the newspapers, the Anglo-Indian newspapers like the Times of India, and the English language
[Guest]: newspapers were really against these vernacular papers or Indians running English papers like
[Guest]: the Maratha was actually an English paper and Kesari was the vernacular paper, Marathi
[Guest]: paper.
[Guest]: So when this was reported, when these speeches which he delivered and other people delivered
[Guest]: in those, in Raikad, they tried to join it.
[Guest]: They have tried to create a proximity with assassination.
[Guest]: And when they raided him, they found literature, which he still, he claimed that it was not
[Guest]: his.
[Guest]: So they found literature about subversive activities.
[Guest]: So they actually arrested him at that point of time to send a message to the vernacular
[Guest]: press and to the people around at that point of time.
[Guest]: And his defense was that this is not sedition.
[Guest]: His defense was there's nothing in his speeches where he tries to incite hatred against the
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: So he actually tried to raise a defense within the law.
[Guest]: He tried to defend himself.
[Guest]: He did not have legal help.
[Guest]: He did everything himself.
[Guest]: So his defense was that he did not say or utter anything which could incite hatred against
[Guest]: the government.
[Guest]: In fact, looked at my other work that I've done.
[Guest]: I'm actually supporting the government and the government's efforts.
[Amit Varma]: That was his defense.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point he had when he couldn't find anyone to defend him, Rabindranath Tagore
[Amit Varma]: got him these two notes from Calcutta.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of those lawyers say something really interesting in his defense of Tilak,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, leads me to my sort of next question, which is a regression, which is
[Amit Varma]: quote, if the government seriously believed Tilak guilty of the abetment of murder, it
[Amit Varma]: ought to have openly accused him of it.
[Amit Varma]: The very fact that he has not been so charged, but prosecuted under 124A, shows the weakness
[Amit Varma]: of the government's case, stop quote, at which point it makes me wonder that if the issue
[Amit Varma]: of sedition is the violence and the damage to property and all of those things, you already
[Amit Varma]: have laws against all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Why would you then need a sedition law at all?
[Guest]: It's a political tool.
[Guest]: It's not a law to punish a person for, for an act as such.
[Guest]: It is a law to punish a person for his thought, for his ideology.
[Guest]: So that was what happened with Tilak as well.
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent since it's a political tool, as you say, to what extent is it used
[Amit Varma]: as a chilling effect, whereby, you know, prosecuting Tilak under the sedition law, the proximate
[Amit Varma]: purpose is that okay, he has done something you disapprove of and you want to punish him
[Amit Varma]: for it.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger purpose is that everyone else shuts up because they don't want it to happen
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Because at the same time, there was some other trials also, which had a larger effect of
[Guest]: the vernacular press being suppressed.
[Amit Varma]: So that was a larger issue.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one of the things that you know, as we've seen earlier in the narrative, that
[Amit Varma]: McCauley's code was basically languishing until 1857 creates a political imperative
[Amit Varma]: and something has to be done.
[Amit Varma]: And it comes into being.
[Amit Varma]: And here again, I think a lot of us forget the environment of the early 1900s, early
[Amit Varma]: 20th century, when, you know, contrary to the peaceful Satyagraha based movements, which
[Amit Varma]: would, which we now remember from the 20s and 30s and 40s, there was actually a lot
[Amit Varma]: of violence in the early years of the 20th century, which worried the British.
[Unknown]: A lot of revolutionary crime.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that and how that shaped the government's approach to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the sedition law itself and other laws like prevention of seditious meetings act in 19th
[Amit Varma]: century.
[Guest]: In 1907, that you talk about.
[Guest]: So this phenomenon, which I talk about revolutionary crime, it was it originated in Bengal, subsequent
[Guest]: to the partition of Bengal.
[Guest]: There was a lot of resentment against the partition.
[Guest]: They thought they were driving a population against each other.
[Guest]: In fact, the Nawab of Dhaka initially was against the idea, but subsequently got around
[Guest]: to it because the British promised him power over that region.
[Guest]: So it's a, it originated there, but the influence was largely Russian.
[Guest]: There was a Russian revolution where they discovered the power of a bomb and that spread
[Guest]: to India, to Bengal and to Punjab.
[Guest]: And they started creating this age of the bomb.
[Guest]: They started throwing bombs, crudely made bombs, but they were trying to get hurt.
[Guest]: Then secret societies formed all over Bengal and what is East Bengal and West Bengal, all
[Guest]: over East and West Bengal, which were called Anusilan Samitis.
[Guest]: What these Samitis would do is they would train youngsters as people, children as young
[Guest]: as 15, 16, 18 to just do violent acts, violent acts of revolution against the government,
[Guest]: send a message across to the government that we are not going to sit silent.
[Guest]: So this age as such was a very, very violent age.
[Guest]: It was more than anything political.
[Guest]: It was resentment.
[Guest]: It was actually hated against the government because of the partition.
[Guest]: And they just discovered these bomb making techniques and literature, which came from
[Amit Varma]: Russia.
[Amit Varma]: So it really helped them.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that, you know, if one looks at the freedom movement, there's obviously
[Amit Varma]: the division between the moderates and the extremists and the moderates like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Gokhale Ranade Agarkar and so on, believe in the power of petitioning and they want
[Unknown]: to sort of work with the power of cooperation and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the so called extremists like, you know, Tilak and Annie Besant and Banerjee are figuring
[Amit Varma]: out that that has its limits.
[Amit Varma]: So B. R. Nanda in a great biography of Gokhale once said something to the effect of the moderates
[Amit Varma]: are extreme in their moderation and the extremists are moderate in their extremism.
[Amit Varma]: So they weren't all that far apart.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, this seems to me about that point in time where people are realizing the
[Amit Varma]: futility of trying to negotiate with the colonial government.
[Amit Varma]: Though Gandhi is trying that in South Africa, and he comes back and he continues trying
[Amit Varma]: that till, you know, the second half of the second decade.
[Amit Varma]: But and now all these violent impulses are beginning to play out.
[Amit Varma]: There's Aurobindo Ghosh and his brother.
[Amit Varma]: There's what is happening in London.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are two recent biographies on Savarkar which talk about India house and
[Amit Varma]: the stuff that is happening there.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, his brother Ganesh Savarkar was, as you point out in your book, convicted for
[Guest]: writing poems.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: This was in Nashik.
[Amit Varma]: He was convicted for writing poems which are considered subversive and seditious.
[Amit Varma]: And Savarkar is, Vinayak Savarkar is very pissed off at this.
[Amit Varma]: He's in London at the time and he gets in, allegedly gets an associate of his mother-in-law
[Amit Varma]: Dhingra to go and assassinate a British guy.
[Amit Varma]: And assassinate the wrong guy.
[Amit Varma]: Assassinates the wrong guy and that sets off a chain of events which leads to Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: being sent to Kalapani for 10 years where he is completely radicalized and then he comes
[Amit Varma]: out and writes Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: So what would have happened if he wasn't arrested?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Is this so much sort of, I mean, the counterfactuals are so incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: You should one day write a book of fiction about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I know what you're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: Wink.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, so all of this is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, sort of, you know, there are other laws coming up, like there's a prevention
[Amit Varma]: of seditious meeting acts coming up.
[Amit Varma]: And Tilak himself is convicted again in a second trial because he praises the making
[Amit Varma]: of bombs.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And the raiders home and they apparently find bomb making manuals.
[Guest]: Is that true?
[Guest]: He really had bomb making manuals.
[Guest]: So, it was not really bomb making manuals.
[Guest]: It didn't teach people how to make bombs, but it related to bombs.
[Guest]: Like it mentions certain kinds of explosives and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And when his house was raided, he was not even there.
[Guest]: He was in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: So it could have been planted.
[Unknown]: It could have been anything.
[Guest]: We will never know.
[Guest]: It was not his.
[Guest]: And he says, even if I have it, how does it matter?
[Guest]: I have not acted upon it.
[Guest]: Have you known me to make bombs?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that was that was completely orchestrated again.
[Guest]: He was, they waited for him to turn up in Bombay before they could arrest him.
[Guest]: They don't want him tried in Pune.
[Guest]: They wanted to try and get him tried in Bombay.
[Guest]: In fact, he turned up there because a buddy of his was to help a buddy of his with a seditious
[Guest]: case of his own.
[Guest]: Kaal.
[Guest]: That was the Kaal trial.
[Guest]: Paranjpe was being tried for sedition and he had turned up to create his defense.
[Guest]: In fact, very interesting that Damodar Savarkar also was in Bombay at the same time.
[Guest]: And when they were agitating against, he was arrested outside the police station then and
[Guest]: he was arrested and convicted for not for sedition or something else.
[Guest]: And he gets out and then goes back.
[Guest]: So it's again a very interesting core connected story.
[Guest]: All these are connected with each other.
[Guest]: So yes, it was again a political exercise.
[Guest]: And again, what he did was that he again defended himself within the confines of the law.
[Guest]: He again had to foot his own legal defense.
[Guest]: He had to do everything himself.
[Guest]: He stood up and spoke in court for more than 24 hours, like combined total of 24, 27 hours.
[Amit Varma]: Practically a filibuster speech.
[Guest]: Yes, a filibuster speech.
[Amit Varma]: His speech started on 15 July and concluded on 22nd July.
[Guest]: Yes, with a weekend break.
[Unknown]: With a weekend break.
[Guest]: Where the jury had to go and check their mail.
[Guest]: So that was that speech.
[Amit Varma]: And unfortunately, some of the speech, but thankfully not all of it.
[Amit Varma]: The speech is a book in itself.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote a bit from it because I kind of underlined it.
[Amit Varma]: And I know you don't like people desecrating books, but I underline furiously.
[Amit Varma]: This is a Tilak speaking as part of his 21 hour speech.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, if the writer's motives are good, he if he is trying to secure constitutional rights
[Amit Varma]: for the people trying in a fair way and persevering manner, he is entitled to express his views
[Amit Varma]: fully and fearlessly.
[Amit Varma]: The mere fact that the views of the writer are not correct or are even absurd or that
[Amit Varma]: he expressed them in violent language would not make him seditious.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I wish a lot of the nationalists of today who sort of seem to revere Tilak would, you
[Guest]: know, pay a little more attention to his support for free speech.
[Guest]: So yeah, but that didn't help him.
[Guest]: The jury was almost all, not almost, it was all white Europeans and Englishmen.
[Guest]: So whatever he would have done, it was premeditated.
[Guest]: And in fact, it's very interesting that the judge who tried him was his lawyer when he
[Guest]: was first convicted.
[Guest]: Dawar.
[Guest]: Dawar, this is Dawar.
[Guest]: This is Dawar was his lawyer when he got bail for Tilak in the first sedition trial.
[Guest]: And Dawar's son was Tilak's lawyer during his second sedition trial.
[Amit Varma]: Another man who was involved was Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah was his actual lawyer.
[Guest]: Was his actual lawyer.
[Guest]: So and but eventually Tilak had to again argue himself, but so it was all premeditated.
[Guest]: It was very interesting because Dawar, what he argued to secure bail for Tilak in the
[Guest]: first trial decided exact opposite in the second trial.
[Guest]: So it was, you could see the kind of bias or rather the kind of anger against Tilak
[Guest]: which existed in that day.
[Guest]: He had become an all powerful figure.
[Guest]: He was in fact bigger than Gandhi at that point of time or rather Gandhi came later.
[Unknown]: Gandhi was well known in India.
[Guest]: He was a giant in South Africa, but Tilak was the giant of the day in 1916.
[Guest]: So yes, it was again completely political.
[Guest]: I keep repeating myself.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm kind of struck by, you know, you quote Dawar's words after Tilak is convicted and
[Amit Varma]: I'm struck by how vituperative they are.
[Amit Varma]: Where Dawar says of Tilak, quote, it seems to me that it must be a diseased mind, a most
[Amit Varma]: perverted intellect that could say that the articles which you have written are legitimate
[Amit Varma]: weapons in political agitation.
[Amit Varma]: They are seething with sedition, they preach violence, they speak of murders with approval
[Amit Varma]: and the cowardly and atrocious act of committing murders with bombs not only seems to meet
[Amit Varma]: with your approval, but you hail the advent of the bomb in India as if something has come
[Amit Varma]: to India for his good.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: And that's what I said.
[Guest]: The anger against Tilak was, everyone's minds were prejudiced.
[Guest]: You couldn't even if you were spoken to 42 hours at a stretch, you still would have been
[Guest]: convicted.
[Amit Varma]: It was a 4-1 conclusion.
[Amit Varma]: And it's it's in sort of an interesting question that kind of strikes me and I think about
[Amit Varma]: this in other contexts as well.
[Amit Varma]: That if we are to look back today with the values of today, we would say that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the British having a sedition law to prevent people rising up against them is understandable
[Amit Varma]: and rational from their point of view.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, looking back today, we can say that we are completely on Tilak's side
[Amit Varma]: and the side of all of these people who were fighting the empire, though that qualifies
[Amit Varma]: as sedition and therefore unlawful at that time.
[Amit Varma]: But the other aspect of it also, and you know, where Gandhi diverged from the likes of Tilak
[Amit Varma]: was when it comes to the means.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, that a lot of these, you know, the Aurobindo Ghosh, Savarkar, to some extent, Tilak in
[Amit Varma]: his tacit support for violent means seem to say that our end is noble, we want to get
[Amit Varma]: rid of the empire and therefore any means are justified.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, even sitting here with this passage of time, it would seem to me that that is
[Amit Varma]: wrong, that the end doesn't justify the means and that a lot of the moral judgment, if you
[Amit Varma]: are to pass any on those people has to do with the means also and not the end.
[Amit Varma]: So the, you know, I'm just thinking that one can't just look at sedition in the classic
[Amit Varma]: one sided way that of course it is a tool of political oppression.
[Amit Varma]: But also a you see why it is necessary and be some of the people that the act was being
[Amit Varma]: used against for basically killing people, they were assassins.
[Guest]: So let's look at it this way.
[Guest]: I won't, I'm not saying that one supports murder here or one supports assassinations
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: But you have to look at a way, look at the context of that day, that the government they
[Guest]: were under, the subjects of whom they were subjects, was not a government of their choice.
[Guest]: It was imposed on them.
[Guest]: The laws were imposed on them, the language was imposed on them, the culture was imposed
[Guest]: on them.
[Guest]: They completely came and changed Indian society.
[Guest]: And they looted from India, the famines which happened, they exported grains didn't leave
[Guest]: anything for the natives.
[Guest]: So when you look at the anger, what they felt, we will not be able to understand it today.
[Guest]: So even to try to contextualize it today, I don't know, I don't think we can do that.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think we are too used to being corseted in a nice democracy.
[Guest]: And yes, we used to living under rule of law, we are used to checks and balances, it may
[Guest]: be getting wiped away.
[Guest]: But today, we are used to that, at that point of time, the rule of law only existed for
[Amit Varma]: the British.
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that that situation is analogous to what Kashmir and Kashmiris are going through
[Unknown]: today?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it seditious even to bring that thought up?
[Guest]: That's a very controversial topic.
[Amit Varma]: But because if we were to say that we would in a sense, we could be accused of sedition.
[Guest]: But at the same time, yeah, they can try for sure.
[Guest]: No, but at the end of the day, until unless someone asks someone to pick up arms against
[Guest]: the government, that's not seditious.
[Guest]: This is a simple, whenever someone asks me that, oh, is this seditious or not?
[Guest]: So if someone says, Oh, Amit Verma said this about Kashmir, oh my god, he should be prosecuted
[Guest]: for sedition.
[Guest]: I said, did he cause violence?
[Guest]: Did he bring the state down?
[Guest]: Or did he try to bring the state down?
[Amit Varma]: If you did not, it is not seditious.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: I hope everyone pays heed to these words of yours.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to sort of the 1970 1918 period where there is on the one hand, you
[Amit Varma]: have the Montague Jamesford reforms, which are being driven by the British Parliament
[Amit Varma]: and are largely progressive and good for us and respectful of us.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you also have the Rowlett Commission or the Sedition Commission, the
[Amit Varma]: Sedition Committee, as it is, which is meeting and deciding how to keep the natives in check.
[Amit Varma]: And what we have isn't adequate.
[Amit Varma]: What more do we need to do?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about you know, what the committee comes up with and the reactions of the Rowlett
[Guest]: Act.
[Guest]: So the committee basically goes through one and a half decades of revolutionary crime,
[Guest]: it chronicles everything and goes to the causes of the crime.
[Guest]: And then it was supposed to make its recommendation on whether the law should be reformed.
[Guest]: When I say reform, it should be made stricter to prevent this because you have to understand
[Guest]: that it also coincided with the First World War in Punjab and in the rest of India, the
[Guest]: Defense of India Act was in play.
[Guest]: So they could not have afforded revolution on one hand war on the other.
[Guest]: So they wanted to prevent this in future.
[Guest]: So what the Rowlett Committee did, it wanted to make the law stricter.
[Guest]: It wanted to make the law stricter.
[Guest]: But ironically, it also built a safety valve in that law.
[Guest]: It said that this law can only be imposed what they call the Rowlett Act and or the
[Guest]: Black Act as the Indians called it.
[Guest]: They wanted it to be imposed only upon a declaration of emergency, a declaration of necessity for
[Guest]: imposition of such law.
[Guest]: So that could only be done in cases of uprising and absolute uprising, which was largely not
[Guest]: accepted by the people.
[Guest]: In fact, that law was a paper tiger.
[Guest]: It died a natural death.
[Guest]: It never came into effect.
[Guest]: But if you look at the law today, even though we are not under the British government, there
[Guest]: is no safety valve built into the law.
[Guest]: It was left to the Supreme Court to finally interpret it.
[Guest]: And even that interpretation is not being followed today.
[Guest]: Nobody even the law enforcement officers don't know what this law is actually about.
[Guest]: And there's no safety valve.
[Guest]: Even the UAPA does not have any safety valve.
[Guest]: You can apply this, the police can arrest anyone at any point of time.
[Guest]: There's no necessity of the situation, let's say in a Chhattisgarh that there's a mass
[Guest]: uprising, an excited movement all across the state.
[Guest]: And that's when you impose 124A.
[Guest]: It's not the case.
[Guest]: Even in peaceful, you're reading a book in Darjeeling and you say, oh, this shouldn't
[Guest]: happen and we should have a change of government and there's that and some nice nationalistic
[Guest]: fellow will come across and say, oh, you're being seditious.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, people have been arrested for Facebook posts.
[Guest]: They've been arrested for receiving messages on a WhatsApp group, or rather just receiving
[Guest]: random messages, which they had no nothing to do with.
[Guest]: So anything, anyone can be just arrested for it.
[Guest]: So it's not the trial, because I mentioned that they say that there's this, there have
[Guest]: been two convictions in the last four from 2014, 2016, but there I could not find a single
[Guest]: conviction.
[Guest]: I did not find a single judgment.
[Guest]: So it's not about trial or whatever.
[Guest]: It's about what happens before that, that arrest and persecution, which happens.
[Amit Varma]: It's a chilling effect.
[Guest]: Like today, we have to keep giving disclaimers that we're not seditious, right?
[Guest]: So that is what happens.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you won't have this fear of speaking to the public about this.
[Amit Varma]: Someone did once threatened to file a sedition case against me, by the way, in the column
[Unknown]: about it as well.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: I was in the column against 295A and 153A.
[Amit Varma]: And somebody said, No, no, you're spreading this affection against the government.
[Guest]: I'll file a case on 124A.
[Guest]: Oh, they should have done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we should have had a why?
[Amit Varma]: We should have gone up to the Supreme Court to get the law settled again.
[Amit Varma]: And you won't even defend me because you do bankruptcy law.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking is very easy, boss.
[Unknown]: I hope that bankruptcy law is treating you well.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you would have paid me well.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have any money, bro.
[Amit Varma]: I'm bankrupt.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, you know, maybe then you would have come good for me.
[Amit Varma]: I want to move on now to a chapter of yours called Gandhi, Azad and Nehru, politics of
[Amit Varma]: sedition.
[Amit Varma]: And you begin this with a quote by Gandhi, which is in his sedition trial in 1922, which
[Amit Varma]: I found profoundly impressive.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to quote the full thing, which is, quote, I would like to state that I entirely
[Amit Varma]: endorse the learned advocate general's remarks in connection with my humble self.
[Amit Varma]: I think that he was entirely fair to me in all statements that he has made, because it
[Amit Varma]: is very true.
[Amit Varma]: And I have no desire whatsoever to conceal from this court.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that to preach this affection towards the existing system of government has become
[Amit Varma]: almost a passion with me.
[Amit Varma]: And the advocate general is also entirely in the right when he says that my preaching
[Amit Varma]: of this affection does not commence with my connection to young India.
[Amit Varma]: This is a magazine Iran.
[Amit Varma]: But that it can commence much earlier.
[Amit Varma]: I do not pled any extenuating act.
[Amit Varma]: I am here, therefore, to invite and submit to the highest penalty that can be inflicted
[Amit Varma]: upon me for what in law is a deliberate crime and what appears to me the highest duty of
[Amit Varma]: the citizen, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And your chapter, of course, talks about different trials in which Gandhi, Maulana Abul Kalam
[Amit Varma]: Azad and Jawaharlal Nehru all pleaded guilty of sedition.
[Amit Varma]: And when I read, you know, and this sort of this was, you know, all of the courts that
[Amit Varma]: you've reproduced in this chapter were very clarifying for me, because the thought that
[Amit Varma]: struck me with your earlier chapter when Tilak and all these guys were under trial, is that
[Amit Varma]: why were they defending themselves?
[Amit Varma]: They were guilty of sedition and they should just stand up proud and say that, yeah, of
[Amit Varma]: course, I am disaffected.
[Amit Varma]: I am preaching this affection, you know, so what is the crime?
[Amit Varma]: And Gandhi, Azad and Nehru actually do this.
[Amit Varma]: And they are all people who are protesting against the British by peaceful means using
[Amit Varma]: non cooperation and civil disobedience and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And this sort of refreshing honesty owning up to what is quote unquote a crime, you know,
[Amit Varma]: seems to bring a moral force to the freedom struggle.
[Guest]: See, this has a lot to do with the change in strategy, I would call it.
[Guest]: The Tilak of 1897 and the Tilak of 1916 did not want a British free India.
[Guest]: They did not want freedom as such.
[Guest]: They wanted the power to govern themselves within the Commonwealth, within under the
[Guest]: patronage of the crown, dominion status, autonomous status.
[Guest]: They never in their life at that point of time had imagined that India could be completely
[Guest]: free of the British.
[Guest]: So this Poon Swaraj thing which happened with Tilak and when he coined the term Swaraj is
[Guest]: my birthright and I'll have it.
[Guest]: That happened later that not happened even at the time of a second trial, right?
[Guest]: So there was a shift in the Indian political scenario after 1919 when Gandhi came here.
[Guest]: When and Gandhi in fact had become very unpopular, which I talked about just before his sedition
[Guest]: trial, he had become very unpopular for calling off the civil disobedience movement because
[Guest]: of because of Chori Chori called it off and the people were very disillusioned.
[Guest]: In fact, if the British wouldn't have prosecuted him, maybe the Gandhi that we know of today
[Guest]: wouldn't have existed.
[Guest]: Maybe we wouldn't have assumed the kind of relevance that he did after that.
[Guest]: Streisand effect.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, exactly.
[Guest]: So we should maybe call it the Gandhi effect.
[Guest]: So basically what they did was they wanted complete freedom.
[Guest]: They wanted Indians to govern India.
[Guest]: They wanted Indians to frame their own laws.
[Guest]: They didn't want laws from England to run the country here.
[Guest]: So what they did was they said that I refuse to recognize the law.
[Guest]: They say fine, this is sedition.
[Guest]: If you say it is sedition, it is sedition.
[Guest]: I refuse to recognize it.
[Guest]: Gandhi called it the prince of political offenses, right?
[Guest]: So what they did was they said, I refuse to recognize your authority over me.
[Guest]: If you say it is sedition, fine, then I am seditious.
[Guest]: I have done it.
[Guest]: You punish me for it.
[Guest]: And all of them asked for punishment.
[Guest]: Nobody said, let me go.
[Guest]: They said, give me the maximum punishment possible.
[Guest]: Gandhi, in fact, said when they said that Tilak got six years, so you should also get
[Guest]: six years.
[Guest]: Gandhi said he was privileged to be equated with Tilak for getting six years.
[Guest]: Nehru simply went up to the magistrate and said, you punish me.
[Guest]: I don't even want to fight you.
[Guest]: There shouldn't be any trial.
[Guest]: I'm admitting to everything.
[Guest]: The magistrate said, please don't do this.
[Guest]: He said, please don't do this.
[Guest]: I'll get you out of it.
[Guest]: And he said, I'll make sure you don't have to face any prison.
[Guest]: Nehru said, thank you so much, but I don't want it.
[Amit Varma]: I want the maximum penalty.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to quote something that Nehru says about the Congress here, which of course,
[Amit Varma]: the Congress then was a very, very different beast from what it is today.
[Amit Varma]: But quote, in the Congress, we have nothing to do with loyalty.
[Amit Varma]: We are disloyal and it is our business to preach this loyalty.
[Amit Varma]: Are you going to be loyal to those people who humiliate your people, who degrade your
[Amit Varma]: country, or are you going to be loyal to your own country, to your own people?
[Amit Varma]: Indian nationalism and British imperialism are at close grips with each other.
[Amit Varma]: British imperialism may succeed in suppressing Indian nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: But remember this also, that while Indian nationalism will grow again, but British imperialism
[Amit Varma]: will be suppressed once and for all by Indian nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the people who are talking rubbish about Nehru today should, you know, really
[Guest]: read up a little more on the sort of moral.
[Guest]: One man almost spent 10 years in jail.
[Guest]: He was in jail when his wife was in on her deathbed.
[Guest]: In fact, he was only released because she was very sick.
[Guest]: His father was in his deathbed when he got arrested when he came back to Allahabad and
[Guest]: they made that speech for which he eventually got arrested.
[Guest]: His father was unwell and his father was unwell because he had been arrested previously and
[Amit Varma]: he also refused to defend himself.
[Amit Varma]: They spent their lives getting arrested.
[Guest]: Yes, they were in.
[Guest]: He was in prison for about 10 years.
[Guest]: His wife was in prison, mother went to prison and his father went to prison.
[Guest]: Everyone at that point of time went to prison and they were proud of it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I must say this, you know, a lot of people sort of look at people like Nehru and
[Amit Varma]: Savarkar in very binary points of view that one is good and the other is evil.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say there are, it's more complicated than that.
[Amit Varma]: For example, it often comes up on Twitter that, hey Savarkar, apologize to the British
[Amit Varma]: and you contrast that with what Nehru is doing now.
[Amit Varma]: But it is also true that Savarkar went to the cellular jail in Andaman, known as Kalapani,
[Amit Varma]: where the sort of tortures inflicted on him were beyond anything, any other.
[Guest]: And not just physical torture, mental torture.
[Guest]: Damodar Savarkar talks about it when in their stories, it's clearly mentioned this man,
[Guest]: he would, he would swallow himself standing up.
[Guest]: He lost control of his bowels.
[Guest]: Yeah, they weren't allowed to go to the, they weren't allowed.
[Amit Varma]: This is really the smallest.
[Guest]: They were allowed to clean themselves.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And they were supposed to toil in the sun.
[Guest]: If you've been to the Andaman, you'll realize how harsh that sun is.
[Guest]: And their cells were, the cells were so small.
[Guest]: As it's, I know some hotel rooms nowadays are very small, but it was even smaller than
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: You couldn't stand up properly.
[Amit Varma]: You had to be bent all the time.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the two recent biographies of Savarkar by Vaibhav Varadhan and Vikram Sampath both
[Amit Varma]: deal with this at some length.
[Amit Varma]: And you can go to the prison diaries of Savarkar himself and other people who were imprisoned
[Amit Varma]: with him to see how bad it was.
[Amit Varma]: So I would just say that we shouldn't always rush to judgment.
[Amit Varma]: I think Savarkar did some truly despicable things and gave rise to despicable ways of
[Amit Varma]: thinking in the twenties onwards, especially with his horrendously bad book Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, had he died in 1910, he'd probably be remembered as a hero today.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Because what he did in England, he set up India House there, the revolutionary activity
[Guest]: in England.
[Guest]: He sent pamphlets from there to Bombay.
[Guest]: So both the brothers had a huge role to play at that point of time.
[Guest]: It's only after Kala Pani that the politics changed.
[Guest]: And I don't really, I may be criticized for this, but I don't really blame him for writing
[Guest]: a letter, a mercy petition.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I would do the same.
[Amit Varma]: I would do the absolute same thing.
[Amit Varma]: The kind of suffering.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Gandhi, Nehru and all these people were basic, they were treated in a very civil
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: They were treated with a lot of respect.
[Guest]: They had access to books, they had access to visitors.
[Guest]: They had, they could write letters.
[Guest]: Nehru wrote his books while in prison.
[Unknown]: I mean, it was the only way he could have written, or maybe today people could write,
[Guest]: but maybe we should throw some people in prison for them to write.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I have a huge amount of criticisms of Nehru for his economic policies post independence.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, all these people contain multitudes and we should remember before we
[Amit Varma]: rush to judgment.
[Guest]: That's why I said that this access to history is very important.
[Guest]: That we need to understand this.
[Guest]: I did not know half of all this when I was researching.
[Guest]: It's only after I read all this that I understood the context of the actions back then.
[Amit Varma]: So we have to wind up in 20 minutes before you have a flight to catch.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to move on from Gandhi, Nehru and Azad and talk about two sort of important
[Amit Varma]: cases just on the cusp of India getting independence, where important judgments were made regarding
[Amit Varma]: 124 A.N.
[Amit Varma]: One of them is Niharendu Dutt Majumdar versus the King Emperor, which is administered by
[Amit Varma]: the federal court, the sort of predecessor to the Supreme Court.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a very interesting judgment.
[Guest]: Tell me why.
[Guest]: So basically, that's when the court created a distinction between mere speech, seditious
[Guest]: speech as they call it, and actually inciting violence.
[Guest]: So sedition as it was understood more or less remained the same from bongo bashi to tilak
[Guest]: to the 1940s.
[Guest]: The interpretation did not change.
[Guest]: For the first time, Justice Mori Squire, he brought in the interpretation which we today
[Guest]: rely upon eventually in the Indian Supreme Court also interpreted the same way that mere
[Guest]: criticism is not seditious until and unless it causes violence.
[Guest]: So just speaking simply, this is what he said.
[Guest]: And eventually it had to be set aside because the criminal justice system of the day and
[Guest]: the politicians of the day thought that this man is ruining everything for us.
[Guest]: It was set aside eventually and the old system was again destroyed in the second case.
[Amit Varma]: And the other case you talk about is the Privy Council judgment of 1947, which sort of takes
[Amit Varma]: the opposite view.
[Guest]: Yes, because they said that Squire is wrong.
[Guest]: He's gone beyond what is written in the statute.
[Guest]: And you should just stick to what the statute says.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this has bearing, you know, there's also a drama playing out when the Indian Constitution
[Amit Varma]: is being written, because, you know, for example, what should our free speech laws be like,
[Amit Varma]: how much free speech should be guaranteed.
[Amit Varma]: And there are sort of debates about this.
[Amit Varma]: Some people are arguing for, you know, the like, US style free speech, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: which I also am broadly in agreement with where it's more or less absolute.
[Amit Varma]: And others are saying that no, we need caveats and the questions come up, what should the
[Amit Varma]: caveats be?
[Amit Varma]: And there's a fierce argument about whether the word sedition should be one of the restrictions.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that and how that pans out.
[Guest]: So the first draft of Article 19 today was originally Article 13.
[Guest]: And one of the restrictions on free speech back then was seditious speech.
[Guest]: So it was supposed to be it wouldn't have been protected by the fundamental right to
[Guest]: freedom of speech and expression.
[Guest]: So that's when certain people in the Constituent Assembly and on the Fundamental Rights Subcommittee
[Guest]: opposed this.
[Guest]: They said that Patel is framing this from the point of view of a constable.
[Guest]: Because the very translating that means that someone has to maintain law and order the
[Guest]: constable or the lowest police officer is responsible for maintenance of law and order.
[Guest]: This is Somnath Lahiri.
[Guest]: Somnath Lahiri who said this.
[Guest]: And Munshi talks about how this how his father and his grandfather, they were punished for
[Guest]: sedition and now this is being imposed on citizens in the Constitution.
[Guest]: So there is a quietly it was just removed from the restrictions on free speech by Patel.
[Guest]: But it reappeared again and again faced huge criticism from the Constituent Assembly from
[Guest]: a lot of people.
[Amit Varma]: So it was eventually removed from the.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that if it was eventually removed, you would assume that
[Amit Varma]: 124A would also go because what basically happened, put simply, correct me if I'm wrong,
[Amit Varma]: is that we took the entire IPC as it was.
[Amit Varma]: And we basically said that whatever in it is contradictory to something in our Constitution
[Amit Varma]: is immediately repealed.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise it stays as it is.
[Amit Varma]: So the assumption was that because of word sedition has been removed from Article 19,
[Amit Varma]: that therefore the sedition law, which is 124A will also cease to be active.
[Amit Varma]: And that in fact, an early ruling was to that effect.
[Amit Varma]: But then the First Amendment we made to our Constitution changed all that.
[Guest]: So basically what the courts did was they gave the blessing to the law.
[Guest]: And they in fact went back to the interpretation given pre-independence interpretation given.
[Guest]: So it actually made the situation even worse than what the Assembly feared that was what
[Guest]: was happening.
[Guest]: Because early India, early democratic India was not able to actually, they were still
[Guest]: fearful that hangover was still there.
[Guest]: They still felt that people because they had just seen a anti-establishment movement, they
[Guest]: still felt that people still have those tendencies within them.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe that's why.
[Amit Varma]: And I did an episode with the historian Gyan Prakash and he spoke about how when the framers
[Amit Varma]: of the Constitution were in that locked room, sort of framing the Constitution, there was
[Amit Varma]: violence all across the country outside.
[Guest]: It was by no means a given that we will stay one nation.
[Amit Varma]: They just come out of the partition violence.
[Amit Varma]: Can you see the context of violence 1857, then the revolutions of the post Bengal splitting
[Amit Varma]: the sort of early 20th century and now again the post partition violence and that is determining
[Guest]: how draconian the laws are.
[Guest]: Because then the violence was not a nationalistic in nature, it became religious.
[Guest]: So they had still had that fear.
[Guest]: Every government has that fear that it will be overthrown not maybe for political reasons,
[Guest]: but maybe for religious reasons.
[Guest]: So that is why they allowed the law to exist on the books.
[Amit Varma]: So now let's get to this seminal case called Kedarnath Singh versus State of Bihar.
[Amit Varma]: As you pointed out earlier, what happens with the First Amendment is that one of the caveats
[Amit Varma]: introduced is public order and the courts therefore now begin to argue about whether
[Amit Varma]: the introduction of this caveat means that the sedition law is constitutional after all.
[Amit Varma]: And you basically have the Patna High Court saying that 124A is constitutional.
[Amit Varma]: The Manipur High Court says it's partly unconstitutional.
[Amit Varma]: The Allahabad High Court finds it to be completely unconstitutional.
[Amit Varma]: And then comes Kedarnath Singh versus State of Bihar.
[Guest]: So the politics of the time, the Communist Party of India was quite popular and quite
[Guest]: powerful and we were at a time where the Congress was the largest party and the second largest
[Guest]: party was the Communist Party.
[Guest]: And in Bihar, this gentleman delivered a speech where he called police the dogs of CID and
[Guest]: said that he was spoken in the bureaucracy.
[Guest]: So he was arrested for sedition under the Congress government and he was arrested for
[Guest]: sedition.
[Guest]: So eventually when the court and he was convicted for it as well.
[Guest]: And this was not the only case.
[Guest]: This was actually a batch of matters from UP and Bihar.
[Guest]: And when these matters eventually reached the Supreme Court, what the Supreme Court
[Guest]: held which applies till date is that till that time, even though they went back to Morris
[Guest]: Goir's interpretation in Niranjan Dutta and they simply said that public order, if there
[Guest]: is a restriction on public order on free speech, that means that there has to be public disorder
[Guest]: for that speech to be seditious.
[Guest]: As long as public order is not disturbed, that speech cannot be curtailed.
[Guest]: So public disorder means violence.
[Guest]: It means just disturbing the status quo somewhere causing law and order problems.
[Guest]: So till the time a writing or a play or a movie or a speech does not incite violence
[Guest]: or public disorder or have the tendency of doing that, that test has to be there for
[Guest]: anything to be declared as seditious.
[Guest]: So very simply put that today, if I say something and that causes people to take up arms against
[Guest]: the government or it may cause people to take up arms against the government, any such thing
[Guest]: will not be seditious till the time that test is met, that it can cause violence or incite
[Guest]: violence against the state.
[Guest]: Because you have to understand, it's not just violence against a community or violence against
[Guest]: a group of or of a political party.
[Guest]: The law is categorized under the offense of against the state.
[Guest]: So it has to be by that very, very simple logic, it has to be violence against the state
[Guest]: and the state today is all powerful.
[Guest]: 20 individuals cannot overthrow the state.
[Guest]: A thousand individuals cannot overthrow the state.
[Guest]: The state is not brittle today.
[Guest]: So what that judgment did was that it introduced that test of violence being caused or likelihood
[Guest]: of violence to be caused.
[Guest]: But unfortunately it is not being followed in spirit.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a lot of people don't even know many aspects of the procedural implications of
[Amit Varma]: 124A.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the ways in which you point out it has evolved is, for example, in the state
[Amit Varma]: of Maharashtra, you know, it's not enough for someone to say file a case of sedition
[Amit Varma]: against me.
[Amit Varma]: It has to also be approved by the government of the day before I can be hauled into court.
[Amit Varma]: But many constable level police inspector level cops don't actually know this.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore the sedition law has become a tool of harassment.
[Guest]: In fact, in all of India, only Maharashtra has these guidelines.
[Guest]: And these guidelines also arise out of a court case when Asim Trivedi was being prosecuted
[Guest]: for sedition after he drew those cartoons.
[Guest]: 2014, I think.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So the court simply said it may be distasteful.
[Guest]: You may not like it, but that does not make it seditious.
[Guest]: It did not incite any violence.
[Guest]: Nothing happened.
[Guest]: So why is he in jail for sedition?
[Guest]: So they set down guidelines.
[Guest]: They said that a person cannot even be arrested for under section 124A till the time there
[Guest]: is a written opinion of a law officer and the investigation has to be done by a senior
[Guest]: police officer among many other things.
[Guest]: So it laid down these guidelines.
[Guest]: Other than Maharashtra, no other state has these guidelines.
[Guest]: Even when a PIL was filed in the Supreme Court saying that you have to enforce Kedarnath,
[Guest]: the court simply said follow Kedarnath.
[Guest]: It did not lay down any guidelines again.
[Guest]: So today what situation is that across the country, there is no sanction required for
[Guest]: arrest.
[Guest]: A sanction is only required when a charge sheet is to be filed and charges are to be
[Guest]: framed against you.
[Guest]: But prior to that, there is no sanction required.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's required under 196 of CRPC.
[Guest]: So to arrest someone for sedition is very easy.
[Guest]: To fire a person to go to court and get a fire registered for sedition is very easy.
[Guest]: So what I spoke about here to build a safety wall here as well is that create a provision
[Guest]: or create a or at least issue guidelines across it should be by from the central government
[Guest]: to all the states that even to arrest someone under 124A, you need prior sanction or the
[Guest]: approval of a high ranking or IG, DG level police officer without a can't even arrest
[Guest]: someone for sedition.
[Amit Varma]: And the argument is that we do have other laws like UAPA.
[Guest]: So we don't really need which is a very stringent law.
[Amit Varma]: It is a draconian law in itself.
[Amit Varma]: We should go by itself.
[Amit Varma]: But you're saying it's a political reality is there to stay.
[Amit Varma]: So why not at least do away with sedition?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we'll have to wind up soon.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll have one final sort of question for you.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd urge all the listeners to read the book.
[Amit Varma]: And if we focused on the historical aspect of it so far, that's what the book also does
[Amit Varma]: extremely well, and which is extremely important.
[Amit Varma]: But to read the later chapters about how the sedition law is in modern times, do read the
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: My question to you is this and here I will be slightly mischievous.
[Amit Varma]: And I will invert Mr. Tilak's argument and use it against the law which was used to imprison
[Amit Varma]: him, which is Tilak's argument back in the day when the age of consent law was passed,
[Amit Varma]: was that look, this is a necessary law, but society is not ready for it.
[Amit Varma]: Most people agree with this.
[Amit Varma]: So change has to happen gradually.
[Amit Varma]: It cannot be imposed top down.
[Amit Varma]: Now in the modern time, you and I are sort of elite liberals who don't believe in all
[Amit Varma]: of these free speech laws like 124A, 153A, 295A.
[Amit Varma]: We would just like them to go right.
[Amit Varma]: But a modern day Tilak could make the argument that society actually agrees that free speech
[Amit Varma]: should not be absolute and these laws are necessary, and that the state is absolute
[Amit Varma]: and it is a crime to be against the state.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, society is not ready for these laws to go and we need these laws.
[Amit Varma]: How would you respond to that?
[Guest]: No, so I would say let the data speak for itself then.
[Guest]: If you look at NCRB data on 124A, which they started compiling from 2014, the number of
[Guest]: FIRs are measly.
[Guest]: The numbers are very, very low.
[Guest]: They claim there have been two convictions.
[Guest]: The NCRB report claims one conviction.
[Guest]: The MHA in Parliament claims two convictions.
[Guest]: I haven't found even a single conviction in these two years.
[Guest]: So your argument is no one is getting convicted under it?
[Guest]: And the chilling effect is massive.
[Guest]: The chilling effect is massive.
[Guest]: So what I'm saying is today at the end of the day, in these three years now, with the
[Guest]: 2017 report coming out from 2014 to 2017, only six sedition trials have been concluded.
[Guest]: Only six trials have been concluded.
[Guest]: And if that is the rate at which trials have been concluded and no one's been convicted
[Guest]: and most cases are dying even before charge sheets are being filed, then what are you
[Guest]: doing with this law?
[Guest]: Why is this law in existence?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one could then argue that there are also good laws with low conviction rates.
[Amit Varma]: So does that mean don't have the laws on the book?
[Guest]: Could be, could be.
[Guest]: But this law, when you have UAPA, when you have laws against destruction of public property,
[Guest]: that is what everyone is being accused of.
[Guest]: If they say violence, even the violence is only against public property, no one can overthrow
[Guest]: the government.
[Guest]: The government is not brittle.
[Guest]: I keep saying this, that the government is not brittle today.
[Guest]: So all they say is someone burnt a few buses, so convicting for sedition is not right.
[Guest]: There are other laws to take care of that.
[Guest]: There's laws to take care of murder, there are laws to take care of arson, of everything's
[Amit Varma]: in place.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need this.
[Amit Varma]: So let me ask you a postscript to my final final question, which you can answer very
[Amit Varma]: briefly before you run through Bombay traffic to try and get to your flight in time.
[Amit Varma]: Good luck with that.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is that, you know, I remember writing columns 10 years ago against 377 against
[Amit Varma]: the adultery law, and they're both gone today, that you know, things evolved to a stage where
[Amit Varma]: they could go naturally with no outcry and no interest groups insisting on keeping those
[Amit Varma]: laws.
[Amit Varma]: Are you hopeful of a time?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, how long will it take that before many of these draconian laws, especially these
[Amit Varma]: sort of free speech laws, and even laws like the UAPA, you know, that our society matures
[Amit Varma]: enough to say that, hey, we don't need this in a healthy democracy.
[Guest]: We may mature enough to say so, our political parties have to mature enough to do that.
[Guest]: Is it a demand and supply?
[Guest]: No, it's not really because at the end of the day, they are the ones who come to power,
[Guest]: it could be a Congress, it could be a BJP, it could be a TMC, it could be anyone.
[Guest]: But for them, it's a very useful tool to have.
[Guest]: Why would they give it up?
[Guest]: So it's a political party which has to mature and say, you know, I'm not afraid of this.
[Guest]: So they are the ones who have to mature at the two hopeful statements were made very
[Guest]: recently by two Supreme Court judges, one of whom will become the Chief Justice of India
[Guest]: after the tenure of the next two and, and he says that when a cartoonist is arrested
[Guest]: for sedition, the constitution weeps.
[Guest]: And Justice Deepak Gupta recently gave a speech in Ahmedabad where he criticized the law of
[Guest]: sedition.
[Guest]: So hopeful statements are coming forward.
[Guest]: But then at the same time, we have a Rajnath Singh and Amit Shah and other politicians
[Guest]: of the BJP saying that this law is required and we will make it stronger.
[Guest]: So that's why I'm saying people may still believe that law should go.
[Guest]: It's a political parties were to be mature enough to say they're not afraid of criticism.
[Guest]: They're not afraid of people saying that what you're doing is wrong.
[Guest]: They have to take it sportingly.
[Guest]: They know that the country cannot be overthrown by a motley group of critics.
[Amit Varma]: It's as simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: After doing so much to come to power, why on earth would you give some of it up?
[Amit Varma]: On that hopeful note, Chitranchal, we could have spoken for hours more.
[Guest]: You should have been here tomorrow morning.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop over to your nearest bookstore and
[Amit Varma]: pick up The Great Repression, the story of sedition in India by Chitranchal Sinha.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Chitranchal on Twitter at Ghair underscore Kanuni.
[Amit Varma]: Let me spell that for you.
[Amit Varma]: G H A I R underscore K A N O O N I.
[Amit Varma]: Ghair underscore Kanuni on Twitter and Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse archives of the scene in the unseen at scene unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I am IVM podcast.com and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Postgraduate courses at the Takshashila Institution start in January.
[Amit Varma]: Do hop over to takshashila.org.in to check them out.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights?
[Unknown]: Do you look up to laws when you are caught up in situations?
[Unknown]: Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere bad?
[Unknown]: Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what your
[Unknown]: rights are.
[Unknown]: Tune in to know your Kanun with me Amar Rana.
[Unknown]: This is a podcast meant to answer all your law related queries.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun every week on the IVM website or the app or anywhere you get your
[Unknown]: podcast from.
[Unknown]: Namaste, I am Saurabh Chandra and I am Pranay Kutastane.
[Unknown]: When the gathering is over, we start solving the most difficult problems of the world
[Unknown]: outside the door.
[Unknown]: We start with the most difficult problems and when we get to the most difficult problems,
[Unknown]: we start solving them.
[Unknown]: Now, apartment owners may not have seen a bridge, but you can understand the feeling.
[Unknown]: So, join us in solving the most difficult problems.
[Unknown]: Pranay and I will go to the depths of the most interesting topics.
[Unknown]: Artificial intelligence, Bitcoin, Pakistan, medical education, currency crisis.
[Unknown]: Sometimes with both of us, and often with the company of a special expert guest.
[Unknown]: Catch Know Your Kanun on the IVM website, app or on your favorite podcasting platform
[Unknown]: today.